<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="./css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="./css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes-2" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol> </ol>
			<h3>FOOTNOTES - Part 2</h3>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-part2-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1683, the year before Bunyan published his Second Part, a little volume was printed under the same title, by some anonymous author; for a description of it, see the Introduction (p. 57). <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>While the carnal heart is in a state of such bitter enmity against the Gospel, it requires wisdom to introduce the subject of religion; still we have a duty to perform, even if the truth should prove a savour of death unto death. We must live the Gospel in the sight of such, and not be daunted from inviting them to become pilgrims to the Celestial City. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I went over the Tract House in New York, and was delighted to see there six steam-presses. During the last year, they printed 17,000 copies of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress'. <cite>—(American Scenes, by Eben. Davies, London, 1849, p. 299)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This poem was written within six years of the first publication of the First Part. In that short period it had become so wonderfully popular as to have been extensively circulated in the languages which the author names, and to have had a large circulation in America. After another four years, namely in 1688, upwards of 100,00 copies had been issued in English; and to the present time it has been steadily increasing in popularity, so that, after 170 years have elapsed, it is more popular than ever. This is a fact without parallel in the annals of literature. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After the author had heard the criticisms of friends and foes upon the First Part, he adopts this second narrative to be a key explaining many things which appeared dark in Christian's journey. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This address prepares the reader for a greater variety of experience and adventures than he meets with in the First Part; all of which are different: and the behaviour of the several pilgrims, under their various calamities, are beautifully described. Their conflicts and their consolations being manifold, convince us that the exercises of every experienced soul are for the most part dissimilar, notwithstanding, if they proceed from the operation of the Spirit, they have the same happy tendency. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> The Second Part is peculiarly adapted to direct and encourage female Christians and young persons; and it is hoped will be a blessing to such. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> Perhaps the Second Part of this pilgrimage comes nearer to the ordinary experience of the great multitude of Christians than the First Part; and this may have been Bunyan's intention. The First Part shows, as in Christian, Faithful, and Hopeful, the great examples and strong lights of this pilgrimage; it is as if Paul and Luther were passing over the scene. The Second Part shows a variety of pilgrims, whose stature and experience are more on a level with our own. The First Part is more severe, sublime, inspiring; the Second Part is more soothing and comforting. The First Part has deep and awful shadows mingled with its light, terribly instructive, and like warnings from hell and the grave. The Second Part is more continually and uninterruptedly cheerful, full of good nature and pleasantry, and showing the pilgrimage in lights and shades that are common to weaker Christians. <cite>—(Cheever)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The First Part had been published six years, during which time Mr. Bunyan had been so fully occupied by his pastoral labours and frequent preaching in different parts of England, that he had not been able to accomplish his design of publishing A FEMALE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. He was without exception the most popular preacher of his day. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The First Part was written in Bedford jail; this is 'about a mile off the place,' at the village of Elstow, where Mr. Bunyan resided, and where his house is still standing—a very humble cottage, and an object of curiosity, as is also the very ancient church and tower. The tower answers to the description of the 'steeple-house' in which Mr. Bunyan was engaged in ringing the bells. 'The main beam that lay overthwart the steeple from side to side,' and under which he stood lest 'one of the bells should fall and kill him,' presents exactly that appearance—. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is quite natural, and very common. The men of this world will canonize those for saints, when dead, whom they stigmatized with the vilest names when living. Besides many others I could mention, this I have peculiarly remarked in respect to that man of God, that faithful minister of Christ, the late Rev. Mr. Whitefield. Scarce anyone went through more public reproach than he did; yet how often have I been amazed to hear persons who held him, his character and conduct, in the vilest contempt when living, who, now he is dead, speak in the most respectful manner of him! O let us leave our characters to Him who died for our sins, and to whom we can commit our souls. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> 'The memory of the just is blessed.' All men's minds water at a pilgrim's gains, while they are resolved never to run a pilgrim's hazards. O let me die his death! all nature cries: Then live his life—all nature falters there. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These words were introduced after the author's decease. Not being able to discover by what authority they were added, I have put them within brackets. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What a thunderbolt is this! Reader, have you ever spoken harshly to, or persecuted, a child of God—a poor penitent sinner? Hear the Word of the Judge of all the earth—'Inasmuch as ye have done it to the least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> Read this and tremble, ye who speak evil of those things which ye know not. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mark this well. No matter what profession we make, if the love of Christ be not its foundation, all is nothing without this love. It is this love in the heart that, like oil in the lamp, keeps the profession of Christ burning bright. The more this love is felt, the more ardent the fire of zeal burns, and the more steadily we shall follow on to know the Lord; and never leave off nor give over, till we see and enjoy the Lord in His kingdom. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is not improbable that Mr. Bunyan had an eye to his own wife and four children, and that these were the leading characters in this religious drama; and also that the history of Christians of his acquaintance furnished the other personages. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> The Editor differs in this opinion, believing that all the experience narrated in the 'Pilgrim's Progress' is drawn from the Sacred Scriptures, and which fits it for every age of the church, to the final consummation of all things. Others have agreed with Mr. Ivimey. Reader, you must form your own opinion. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though moral suasion, and all the affectionate arguments from a tender husband, or an affectionate parent, may prove ineffectual for the present; yet, when the Lord works by His mighty power, then only they prove effectual to saving purposes. Then let us not neglect our duty, but be earnest in it, and leave the event to sovereign grace. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Those who cruelly and unkindly treat their godly relations and friends on account of their religion, must come to feel it in the bitterness of their spirit, and groan in the sorrow of their soul, if ever the Lord grants them repentance unto life. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Happy is that death which brings the believer to Heaven, and the surviving relatives to Christ; which opens the gate of glory to one, and the door of conversion to the other. <cite>—(Barder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Is it any marvel, that a quickened enlightened sinner should be judged by those around him, who are yet dead in their sins, to Be full of whims and melancholy? No! it is very natural for them to think us fools and mad; but we know that they really are so. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of God's ends in instituting marriage is, that, under a figure, Christ and His church should be set forth. There is a sweet scent wrapped up in that relation. Be such a husband to thy believing wife, that she may say, God hath given to me a husband that preacheth Christ's carriage to the church every day.—If thy wife be unbelieving, thou hast a duty to perform under a double obligation; for she is liable every moment to eternal ruin. O how little sense of the worth of souls is there in the hearts of some husbands! This is manifest by their unchristian carriage to and before their wives.—Wives also should be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands. Why? Because, otherwise, the Word of God will he blasphemed (Titus 2:5). Take heed of an idling, talking, wrangling tongue. It is odious in maids or wives to be like parrots, not bridling the tongue. It is unseemly to see a woman, as much as once in her lifetime, to offer to over-top her husband. I do not intend that women should he slaves by this subjection: 'Let every man love his wife as himself and the wife see that she reverence her husband' (Eph. 5:33). Abigail would not speak a word to her churlish husband until he was in a sober temper, and his wine gone out of him. <cite>—(Bunyan's Christian Behaviour, vol. 2, pp. 558-561)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the first cry of an awakened sinner—mercy for the lost and miserable; and no sooner are the sinner's eyes opened to see his ruined, desperate state, and to cry for mercy, but the god of this world, who hitherto had blinded the eyes, and kept the heart securely by presumption, now opposes the sinner's progress to a Throne of Grace, to a God of mercy, and to the Saviour of the lost. Satan does not easily part with his prey. But Jesus, the strong man, armed with almighty power and everlasting love, will conquer and cast him out. That is the sinner's mercy, or none could ever be saved. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The mind, during sleep, is often occupied with those subjects that have most deeply engaged the waking thoughts; and it sometimes pleases God to make use of ideas thus suggested, to influence the conduct by exciting fears or hopes. But if we attempt to draw conclusions on doctrines, or to discover hidden things by them, it becomes a dangerous species of enthusiasm. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> There is no just reason to doubt that God still employs dreams for the conversion of sinners. 'In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed; then He openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction' (Job 33:15, 16). <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> Dreams are sometimes of use to warn and encourage a Christian, and seem to be really 'from God'; but great caution is necessary, lest they mislead us, as they do weak and enthusiastic persons. They must never Be depended on as the ground of hope, or the test of our state; nothing must be put in the place of the Word of God. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom' (Psa. 111:10); and 'the secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him' (Psa. 25:14). The Spirit, the Comforter, never convinces the soul of sin, but He also revives and comforts the heart with glad tidings of free and full pardon of sin, through the blood of the Lamb. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Probably the name of this visitor was derived from what was said by the heavenly visitor to Manoah (Judg. 13:18). <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> The silent influences of the Holy Spirit are here personified. The intimations of Secret represent the teachings of the Holy Spirit, by which the sinner understands the real meaning of the Sacred Scriptures as to the way of salvation. <cite>—(Scott, abridged)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Rote of heart'; 'rote' is to commit to memory, so as to be able to repeat fluently, as a wheel runs round, but without attaching any idea or sense to the words; 'rote of heart' is to do this with a full understanding of the meaning. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As the Spirit testifies of Christ, so He leads the soul to Christ, that He may be the sinner's only hope, righteousness, and strength.</p>
					<p>Thus He glorifies Christ. <cite>—(Mason)</cite></p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>But bring thou with thee a certificate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To show thou seest thyself most desolate;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Writ by the Master, with repentance seal'd.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(House of God, vol. 2, p. 580)</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Blessed penitence! Christian's children, when he set out in his pilgrimage, had been liable to Mr. Bunyan's severe remarks in his valuable book on Christian Behaviour—'I observe a vile spirit amongst some children, who overlook, or have slighting or scornful thoughts of their parents. Such an one hath got just the heart of a dog or a beast, that will bite those that begot them. But my father is poor, and I am rich, and it will he a hindrance to me to respect him. I tell thee, thou arguest like an atheist and a beast, and standest full flat against the Son of God (Mark 7:9-13). Must a little of the glory of the butterfly make thee not honour thy father and mother? Little dost thou know how many prayers, sighs, and tears have been wrung from their hearts on thine account.'. <cite>—(Vol. 2, pp. 562, 563)—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The awakening of a sinner may be effected by very different means. Lydia's heart was opened through attending to Paul's ministry; the jailer's, through the alarm produced in his mind by the fear of disgrace and punishment. Christian was brought to a sense of his lost condition by reading the Scriptures; Christiana, by reflecting, after the death of her husband, upon her unkind treatment of him on account of his religion, the thought of which 'rent the caul of her heart in sunder'; and the four boys, by the conversation of their mother with them about their departed father, and about her having neglected their souls. Religion is a personal concern, and begins with repentance and sorrow for sin. Children are not saved by the faith of their parents, but must be individually brought to feel their own sinfulness, and to confess their own guilt and danger; nor will a mother's prayers save her children, unless they heartily unite with her in them. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reader, stop and examine. Did ever any of your carnal acquaintance take knowledge of a difference of your language and conduct? [Does it stun them?] Or do they still like and approve of you as well as ever? What reason, then, have you to think yourself a pilgrim? If the heart be ever so little acquainted with the Lord, the tongue will discover it, and the carnal and profane will ridicule and despise you for it. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Is willing to stay behind.' Mr. Bunyan has strongly intimated, in this account, that children, very young persons, may be the subjects of renewing grace, and may experience the power of the Gospel upon their hearts, producing that faith that is of the operation of God, and works meet for repentance. This fact is abundantly confirmed by many living instances of very young persons knowing the grace of God in truth, and adorning the doctrine of God our Saviour. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was a love-letter, full of the love of Jesus, and the precious invitations of His loving heart to sinners to come unto Him as recorded in his blessed Word. Happy sinners, whose eyes are opened to read it! But this the world calls madness. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The observations of the unconverted, when they perceive the conscience of a poor sinner alarmed for fear of the wrath to come, are admirably put in Bunyan's Come and Welcome, (vol. 1, p. 278): 'They attribute the change to melancholy—to sitting alone—to overmuch reading—to going to too many sermons—to too much studying and musing on what they hear. They conclude that it is for want of merry company—for want of physic; and they advise them to leave off reading, going to sermons, the company of sober people, and to be merry, to go a-gossiping. But, poor ignorant sinner, let me deal with thee. It seems that thou hast turned counsellor for Satan. Thou judgest foolishly. Thou art like Elymas the sorcerer, that sought to turn the deputy from the faith, to pervert the right ways of the Lord. Take heed, lest some heavy judgment overtake thee.' Pilgrim, beware of the solemn warnings of God in Deuteronomy 13:6, and Hebrews 10:38. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bunyan probably alludes to Proverbs 17:16: 'Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it?'. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is well to be bold in the name of the Lord, and blunt with those who seek to turn us away from following on to know the Lord; for nothing less than life and salvation, or death and damnation, will be the issue of it. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The very things which excite the rage and scorn of some persons, penetrate the hearts of others. Thus the Lord waked one to differ from another, by preparing the heart to receive the good seed of Divine truth. Yet everyone willingly chooses the way he takes, without constraint or hindrance, except his own prevailing dispositions. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here we see our Lord's Word verified, 'The one shall be taken, and the other left' (Matt. 24:41). Mercy is called, and Timorous left. All, to appearance, seems chance and accident; but sovereign grace overrules all things. 'All things are of God, who hath reconciled us to Himself by Jesus Christ' (2 Cor. 5:18). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This tale, by the names, arguments, and discourse introduced into it, shows what kind of persons despise and revile all those that fear God, and seek the salvation of their souls. Profligates, who never studied religion, pass sentence upon the most difficult controversies without hesitation. Such persons call for our compassion and prayers even more than our detestation. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O how do such carnal wretches sport with their own damnation, while they despise the precious truths of God, and ridicule His beloved, chosen, and called people! But as it was in the beginning, he who was born after the flesh persecuted Him who was born after the Spirit, so it is now, and will be as long as the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent are upon the earth. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Such characters are portrayed by the apostle, in his solemn riddle (1 Tim. 5:6). <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The singular dispensations of Providence, and the strong impressions made by the Word of God upon some minds, seem to amount to a special invitation; while others are gradually and gently brought to embrace the Gospel, and these are sometimes discouraged lest they have never been truly awakened. They should recollect that the Lord delighteth in mercy; that Christ will in no wise cast out any that come to Him; and that they who trust in the mercy of God, solely through the redemption of His Son, shall assuredly be saved. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such is the true spirit of real pilgrims, that do not love to eat their precious morsel alone. They wish others to know Christ, and to become followers of Him with themselves. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though Christiana clearly knew her calling of God, yet Mercy did not; therefore she is in doubt about it. Just so it is with many at their first setting out. Hence they are ready to say—and I have met with many who have said—that they could even wish to have had the most violent convictions of sin, and to have been, as it were, shook over the mouth of hell, that they might have a greater certainty of their being called of God. But this is speaking unadvisedly. Better to take the apostle's advice—'Give all diligence to make your calling sure.'. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is a precious discovery of a heart divinely instructed. Mind, here is no looking to anything Mercy was in herself, nor to anything she could do for herself, for hope. But all is resolved into this—even THE LOVE OF THE HEART OF THE KING OF HEAVEN. Reader, can you be content with this? Can you cast all, and rest all, upon the love of Christ? Then bless His loving name for giving you a pilgrim's heart. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Mercy clearly discovered a work of grace on her heart. She was anxious about her acceptance at last; she began to pray; she threw herself on the mere mercy of Christ's heart; and proved 'the bowels of a pilgrim,' by lamenting the sad condition of her carnal relations. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This truth is exemplified in the Holy War—'Now Mr. Desires, when he saw that he must go on this errand, besought that Mr. Wet-eyes should go with him to petition the Prince. This Mr. Wet-eyes was a poor man, a man of a broken spirit, yet one that could speak well to a petition. Then Mr. Wet-eyes fell on his face to the ground, and said, O my Lord, I see dirt in my own tears, and filthiness at the bottom of my prayers; but, I pray Thee, mercifully pass by the sin of Mansoul.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps the most delightful portion of the Second Dream of Bunyan is its sweet representation of the female character. There never were two more attractive beings drawn than Christiana and Mercy; as different from each other as Christian and Hopeful, and yet equally pleasing in their natural traits of character, and under the influence of Divine grace, each of them reflecting the light of Heaven in an original and lovely variety. His own conception of what constitutes a bright example of beauty and consistency of character in a Christian woman, Bunyan has here given us, as well as in his First Dream, the model of steadfast excellence in a Christian man. The delineation, in both Christiana and Mercy, is eminently beautiful. We have, in these characters, his own ideal of the domestic virtues, and his own conception of a well-ordered Christian family's domestic happiness. Wherever he may have formed his notions of female loveliness and excellence, he has, in the combination of them in the Second Part of the 'Pilgrim's Progress,' presented two characters of such winning modesty and grace, such confiding truth and frankness, such simplicity and artlessness, such cheerfulness and pleasantness, such native good sense and Christian discretion, such sincerity, gentleness, and tenderness, that nothing could be more delightful. The matronly virtues of Christiana, and the maidenly qualities of Mercy, are alike pleasing and appropriate. There is a mixture of timidity and frankness in Mercy, which is as sweet in itself as it is artlessly and unconsciously drawn; and in Christiana we discover the very characteristics that can make the most lovely feminine counterpart, suitable to the stern and lofty qualities of her husband. <cite>—(Cheever)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Instead of being what they profess, the King's labourers, Paul calls them soul-troublers (Gal. 5:10). For instead of preaching a free, full, and finished salvation, bestowed as a free gift, by rich grace, upon poor sinners who can do nothing to entitle themselves to it; behold, these wretched daubers set forth salvation to sale upon certain terms and conditions which sinners are to perform and fulfil. Thus they distress the upright and sincere, and deceive the self-righteous and unwary, into pride and delusion. Thus they mar, instead of mend, the way; and bring dirt and dung, instead of stones, to make the way sound and safe for pilgrims. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Looked well to the steps'; that is, 'the promises,' as Bunyan explains in the margin of Part First. 'Struggling to be rid of our burden, it only sinks us deeper in the mire, if we do not rest by faith upon the promises, and so come indeed to Christ. Precious promises they are, and so free and full of forgiveness and eternal life, that certainly the moment a dying soul feels its guilt and misery, that soul may lay hold upon them, and find Christ in them; and were it not for unbelief, there need be no Slough of Despond for the soul to struggle, and plunge, in its mire of depravity.'. <cite>—(Cheever)—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All the varieties in the experience of those who are walking in the same path can never he enumerated; some of their sores are not only unreasonable but unaccountable, through the weakness of the human mind, the abiding effects of peculiar impressions, the remains of unbelief, and the artifices of Satan. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No sooner does a poor sinner open his lips in prayer to Jesus, but the devil will bark at him, and by all means try to terrify and discourage him. Do you find this? What is our remedy? 'Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you' (James 4:7, 8). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> When the fear of God possesses the heart, such disturbances cannot long prevent earnest cries for mercy, but will eventually render them more fervent and importunate than ever. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Think much of them that have gone before; how safe they are in the bosom of Jesus. Would they be here again for a thousand worlds? Sometimes when my base heart hath been inclining to this world, and to loiter in my journey towards Heaven, the very consideration of the glorious saints and angels—what they enjoy, what low thoughts they have of the things of this world, how they would befool me if they did but know that my heart was drawing back—this hath made me rush forward, and disdain those beggarly things; and say to my soul, Come, soul, let us not be weary; let us see what Heaven is; let us venture all for it. Reader, what sayest thou to this? Art thou resolved to follow me? Nay, resolve to get before me if thou canst. <cite>—(Heavenly Footman)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Being made to understand what great sinners the Lord hath had mercy upon, and how large His promises were still to sinners, this made me, through the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to cleave to Him, to hang upon Him, and yet to cry, though as yet there were no answer. The Lord help all His poor, tempted, afflicted people to do the like. <cite>—(Bunyan)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mercy's case is not singular. Many have set out just as she did, and have been discouraged by the same reason as she was. She, as many have been, was encouraged to set out in the ways of the Lord by her neighbour and friend. Hence she, as many others also have thought, there was no cause to conclude that she was effectually called by the Lord, but it was only the effect of moral persuasion, and therefore doubted and fainted, lest she should not meet with acceptance. But her very doubts, fears, and distress, proved the earnestness of her heart, and the desire of her soul, after the Saviour; and also that His attracting love and gracious power had a hand in the work. Well therefore might Bunyan call upon his readers to mark her gracious reception by Christ. Mark this, ye poor, doubting, fearing, trembling souls, who are halting every step, and fearing you have not set out aright, hear what Christ's angel said, and be not discouraged: 'Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus!'. <cite>—(Matt. 28:5)—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prisoners taken in the Holy War were affected like Mercy. 'Why did you not cry to Me before, said the Prince, yet I will answer you so as will be for My glory. At this Mr. Wet-eyes gave a great sigh, and death seemed to sit on their eye-brows; they covered their faces, and threw themselves down before Him. Then the Prince bid them stand upon their feet, and said, I have power to forgive, and I do forgive. Moreover, He stripped the prisoners of their mourning-weeds, and gave them beauty for ashes.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pardon by word seems to denote the general discovery of free salvation by Jesus Christ to all that believe, which is sealed by transient comforts and lively affections. Pardon by deed may relate to the manner in which the blessing was purchased by the Saviour; and when this is clearly understood, the believer attains to stable peace and hope. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The devil often barks most at us, and brings his heaviest accusations against us, when mercy, peace, comfort, and salvation are nearest to us.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>'Press on, nor fear to win the day,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though earth and hell obstruct the way'.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Mason)</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many hellish darts are tipped by Apollyon's malignant ingenuity with sentences of Scripture, made to flame just like the fiery darts of the wicked one; so that the Scriptures appear to stand against the trembling Christian. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is genuine humility; no replying against God—no calling in question His sovereign right to receive or to reject. No; all that this poor humble heart thought was, now is fulfilled what is written, 'One shall be taken and the other left.' If so, what had she to say? No impeachment of the Lord's dealings, but only, I am undone. But yet, on seeing what was written over the gate, 'Knock, and it shall be opened,' from that, and not from any sight of worthiness in herself, but lost as she felt herself, she was encouraged to knock again, or to cry and pray more vehemently than ever. Here is a blessed example of deep humility, and of holy boldness, excited by the Divine Word. Go thou, ruined sinner, and do likewise. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The express words of such invitations, exhortations, and promises, WRITTEN in the Bible, are more efficacious to encourage those who are ready to give up their hopes, than all the consolatory topics that can possibly he substituted in their place. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When a mariner enters upon a voyage, or a soldier on a campaign, they know not what hardships they may encounter, nor whether their lives may be sacrificed without attaining their object; but whatever hardships the Christian has to encounter, he will come off more than conqueror—he will reach the desired haven in safety—through Him that loved us. Fear not—'Though death and hell obstruct the way, The meanest saint shall win the day.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strive to enter in; a whole Heaven and eternal life is wrapped up in this little word IN. Strive; this calls for the mind and heart. Many professors make their striving to stand rather in an outcry of words, than in a hearty labour against the lusts and love of the world, and their own corruptions. But this kind of striving is but a beating the air, and will come to nothing at last. <cite>—(Bunyan's Strait Gate, vol. 1, p. 869)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus the dog of hell may be of service, not only in keeping the sheep close together, but in making them keep close to their Shepherd. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Plash' was, in later editions, altered to 'Pluck.' To plash, is to cut hedges or trees. The boys did plash, or had a cut at the trees, to knock the fruit off. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What is this garden but the world? What is the fruit they here found? 'The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life' (1 John 2:16). Of this the boys ate. The mother chides them for taking that which did not belong to them, but she did not know that it grew in the devil's garden. Mark the consequence of their eating this fruit hereafter. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> The terrifying suggestions of Satan [the dog's barking] give believers much present uneasiness, yet they often do them great good, and seldom eventually hurt them; but the allurements of those worldly objects which he throws in their way are far more dangerous and pernicious. Many of these are very attractive to young persons; but all parents who love the souls of their children should employ all their influence and authority to restrain them from those vain pleasures which 'war against the soul,' and are most dangerous when least suspected. This fruit may be found in the pilgrim's path, but it grows in Beelzebub's garden, and should be shunned as poison. Many diversions and pursuits, both in high and low life, are of this nature, though often pleaded for as innocent, by some persons who ought to know better. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What are these ill-favoured ones? Such as you will be sure to meet with in your pilgrimage; some vile lusts, or cursed corruptions, which are suited to your carnal nature. These will attack you, and strive to prevail against you. Mind how these pilgrims acted, and follow their example. If one was to fix names to these ill-favoured ones, they might he called Unbelief and Licentiousness, which aim to rob Christ's virgins of their chastity to Him. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here we see that the most violent temptation to the greatest evil is not sin, if resisted and not complied with. Our Lord Himself was tempted in all things like as we are, yet without sin. Therefore, ye followers of Him, do not be dejected and cut down, though you should be exercised with temptations to the blackest crimes, and the most heinous sins. You cannot be assaulted with worse than your Lord was. He was tempted, but He resisted Satan, and overcame all, in our nature. Cry to Him; He is the Reliever who will come in the hour of distress. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Ye have not, because ye ask not.' (James 4:2). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is well to be taken with present blessings, to be joyful in them, and thankful for them; but it is wrong to forget our dangers, and grow secure. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When the soul is happy in the love of God, it is ready to conclude that dangers are past, that doubts and fears are entirely removed; but as long as we are in this world, we shall find the expediency of our Lord's exhortation—'Watch and pray.'. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite>  <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is a display of a truly Christian spirit, in that open and ingenuous confession of her fault, taking all the blame upon herself, and excusing Mercy. This is not natural to us, but the grace of Christ humbles the heart, and silences the tongue to self-justifying pleas. O for more of this precious grace! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mark those phrases—'the riches of His grace,' and 'His mere good pleasure.' You cannot entertain too exalted ideas of these, nor speak too highly of them. Pilgrims should be known by their language as well as their walk. Those who talk highly of their own perfection, speak little, if at all, of the riches of God's grace, and the good pleasure of His will. Beware of the infection of pride and self-righteous leaven. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Holy Spirit, the Interpreter, who was promised by the Lord Jesus to be sent in His name, guides believers into all truth. 'And they shall be all taught of God' (John 6:45). Humble confession, and serious consecration of heart, are sacrifices acceptable, well-pleasing to God; and such simple-hearted pilgrims are received by the church with a hearty welcome. 'The Spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him that heareth say, Come' (Rev. 22:17). <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is joy indeed, which strangers to the love of Christ intermeddle not with. Surely, this is the joy of Heaven; and if thou hast this joy, thou hast the love that reigns in Heaven. Glory to Jesus, I think I can truly say, I have this blessed evidence in my heart, that I know somewhat of this joy arising from seeing poor lost sinners converted to Jesus, so as to love Him and follow Him. O for a spread and increase of this spirit among Christians of all denominations! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The emblematical instruction at the Interpreter's house, in the former part, was so important and comprehensive, that we are astonished at the striking additions here adduced. The first emblem is very plain; and so apposite, that it is wonderful any person should read it without lifting up a prayer to the Lord, and saying, 'O deliver me from this muck-rake!'. <cite>—(Scott, altered by ED)</cite> Awful thought! Straws, and sticks, and dust, Preferred to Christ and salvation! 'If angels weep, it is at such a sight!'. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our Lord said, 'Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.' To be carnally-minded is death, but to be spiritually-minded is life and peace. If our treasure is in Heaven, we need not envy those griping muck-worms who are cursed in their basket and in their store. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse"><p><span>The vulture of insatiate minds</span><br/>
					<span>Still wants, and wanting seeks, and seeking finds</span><br/><span>New fuel to increase her rav'nous fire.</span><br/><span>The grave is sooner cloy'd than men's desire.</span></p>&gt;
<cite>—(Quarles' Emblems)</cite>
</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A full purse and a lean soul, is a sign of a great curse. O it is a sad grant, when the desire is only to make the belly big, the estate big, the name big; when even by this bigness the soul pines, is made to dwindle, to grow lean, and to look like an anatomy! Like a man in a dropsy, they desire this world, as he doth drink, till they desire themselves quite down to hell. <cite>—(Bunyan's Desire of the Righteous, vol. 1, p. 767)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reader, didst thou never shed a tear for thy base and disingenuous conduct towards thy Lord, in preferring the sticks and straws of this world to the unsearchable riches of Christ, and the salvation of thy immortal soul? O this is natural to us all! and though made wise unto salvation, yet this folly cleaves to our old nature still. Let the thought humble us, and make us weep before the Lord. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They knew the venom of sin which was in their fallen nature. This made them cover their faces with shame, and sink into deep humility of heart. Every true interpreter of God's Word—yea, the blessed Interpreter of God's heart, Jesus—will look pleasantly upon such who confess the truth; while He beholds the proud, self-righteous sinner afar off. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Faith apprehends, and then the soul dwells in the best room indeed, even in the very heart of God in Christ. The Lord increase our faith in this precious truth, that we may the more love and glorify the God of grace and truth! O let not our venom of sin deject us, while there is the blood of Christ to cleanse us! O for a stronger love to Christ, and greater hatred of sin! Both spring from believing. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> The emblem of the spider is illustrated in Bunyan's invaluable treatise on the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment—'The spider will be a witness against man, for she layeth hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces. It is man only that will not lay hold on the kingdom of Heaven, as the spider doth bid him (Prov. 30:28).'. <cite>—(Vol. 2, p. 111)—(ED)</cite></p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Call me not ugly thing;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>God's wisdom hath unto the pismire given,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And spiders may teach men the way to Heaven.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Bunyan's Emblems)</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is very humbling to human pride to be compared to chickens, as dependants on the fostering care of the hen, or as children relying upon a parent. In Bunyan's Last Sermon, are some striking allusions to the Christian's dependence upon his heavenly Father—'It is natural for a child, if he wants shoes, to tell his father; if he wants bread, they go and tell him. So should the children of God do for spiritual bread—strength of grace—to resist Satan. When the devil tempts you, run home and tell your heavenly Father—pour out your complaints to God; this is natural to children. If any wrong them, they tell their father; so do those that are born of God, when they meet with temptations, they go and tell God of them. <cite>—(Vol. 2, p. 757)—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Common call, the invitations; brooding voice, the promises; outcry, the warnings of the Gospel. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Observations and experience justify this excellent simile. God's common call is to all His creatures who live within the sound of His Gospel. His special call is when He bestows the grace, peace, and pardon of the Gospel of Christ upon His people. The brooding note is when He gathers them under His wings, warms their hearts with the comforts of His love, nourishes their souls with close fellowship with Himself, and refreshes their spirits with the overflowings of joy in the Holy Ghost. 'In the shadow of Thy wings will I rejoice,' says David (Psa. 63:7). 'I sat down under His shadow with great delight, and His fruit was sweet to my taste' (Song. 2:3). O for more of these precious brooding notes, to be gathered under the wing of Immanuel! But be our frames and experiences what they may, still we are ever in danger; for our enemies surround us on every side, and our worst are within us. Therefore our Lord has an outcry; He gives the alarm, calls us, and warns us of danger. Why? That we should flee. O pilgrims, when dangers are near, run unto Him! For 'the name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe' (Prov. 18:10). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The church is a garden enclosed, Christ is the Gardener, His people are called God's husbandry. The difference in the plants and flowers shows the different effects of grace upon the heart. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> When Christians stand everyone in his place, and do their own work, then they are like the flowers in the garden, that stand and grow where the Gardener hath planted them; and then they shall both honour the garden in which they are planted, and the Gardener that hath so disposed of them. From the hyssop in the wall, to the cedar in Lebanon, their fruit is their glory. Christians are like the several flowers in a garden, that have upon each of them the dew of Heaven; which, being shaken with the wind, they let fall their dew at each others' roots, whereby they are jointly nourished, and become nourishers of one another. For Christians to commune savourly of God's matters one with another, it is as if they opened to each others' nostrils boxes of perfume. Saith Paul to the church at Rome, 'I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may he established; that is, that I may be comforted together with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me' (Rom. 1:11, 12). <cite>—(Bunyan's Christian Behaviour, vol. 2, pp. 550, 570)</cite> I have observed, that as there are herbs and flowers in our gardens, so there are their counterfeits in the field; only they are distinguished from the other by the name of wild ones. There is faith and wild faith; and wild faith is presumption. I call it wild faith, because God never placed it in His garden—His church; it is only to be found in the field—the world. <cite>—(Bunyan's Good News, vol. 1, p. 93)</cite> We ought not to be contented with a situation among the noxious weeds of the desert; but if we be planted among the ornamental and fragrant flowers of the Lord's garden, we are honoured indeed. We should watch against envy and ambition, contempt of our brethren and contention. We ought to be satisfied in our places, doing 'nothing through strife or vain glory, or with murmurings and disputings'; but endeavour, in the meekness of wisdom, to diffuse a heavenly fragrance around us, and to adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The husbandman is not repaid by the straw or chaff. So the sufferings of Christ, the preaching, promises, and ordinances of the Gospel, were not intended to bring men to profess certain doctrines, or observe certain forms; but to render men fruitful in good works, by the influences of the Spirit of Christ. All profession will terminate in everlasting misery, which is not productive of this good fruit. 'True religion and undefiled' consists not in forms, creeds, and ceremonies, but is 'to visit and comfort the widows and the fatherless'. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a necessary caution. Paul says, 'Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself, for thou that judgest doest the same things.' James has laid down an excellent rule of conduct—O that it were more attended to!—'So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall he judged by the law of liberty.' How inconsistent for a pardoned malefactor to insult even those who are under condemnation! If any man seemeth to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue from commending himself and condemning others, this man's religion is vain. He that judgeth his brother speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A very striking emblem this, and most pertinently applied; and if your soul is sincere, it will cause a holy fear, create a godly jealousy, put you upon self-examining, and make you sigh out in some such words as David, 'Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting' (Psa. 139:23, 24). O what will it avail in a dying hour, or in the judgment day, that we have worn the mark of profession, and seemed to man, what we were not in heart and reality of life before God! From all self-deceiving, good Lord, deliver us! for we are naturally prone to it. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This observation is grounded on the good old distinction, that the merit of Christ's obedience unto death is sufficient all who by faith apply for an interest in it. Nothing but pride, the carnal mind, and enmity to God and religion, influence men to neglect so great salvation; and when the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit accompanies the Word, sinners are made willing to accept the proffered mercy, and encouraged by the invitations which before they sinfully slighted. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is my very character, says many a doubting, broken hearted sinner. Well, thank God, says many a self-confident, whole-hearted Pharisee, it is far from being mine. We can only say this, he that knows most of his own superlatively deceitful and desperately wicked heart, suspects himself most, and exercises most godly jealousy over himself; while persons, who see least of themselves, are most self-confident and daring. Even Judas could as boldly ask, 'Master, is it I' who shall betray Thee? as any of the rest of His disciples. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Ivimey supposes this to be intended by Mr. Bunyan to show his approbation of the practice of singing in public worship. It was then a custom which had been recently introduced, and was a subject of strong controversy. Soon after Bunyan's death, Benjamin Keach vindicated the practice, by proving that singing is an ordinance of Jesus Christ, in answer to Marlowe's Discourse against Singing. It must not be forgotten, that our pilgrim forefathers generally met in secret, and that singing would have exposed them to imminent peril of their lives. Now we have no such fear; we can unite heart and voice in the language of Dr. Watts—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Lord, how delightful 'tis to see</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A whole assembly worship Thee!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At once they sing.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>That is, when singing men or women do not prevent the godly from uniting in this delightful part of Divine worship by introducing new tunes, to sing to the praise and glory of themselves. Let such as are guilty of this solemnly ask the question, Was the late Mr. Huntingdon right in estimating their piety at less than twopence per dozen? <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ah, Mrs. Timorous, how many professed pilgrims hast thou befooled and turned back! How often does she attack and affright many real pilgrims! I am sure she has often made my poor heart ache with her ghastly looks and terrifying speeches. O may we ever say to her, in our Lord's words, 'Get thee behind me, Satan; thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men' (Matt. 16:23). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A very simple and artless confession. The Lord works very differently upon His elect; but always to the same end, namely, to make us prize Christ, His salvation and His ways, and to abhor ourselves, the paths of sin, and to cast off all self-righteous hopes. If this is effected in thy heart, reader, it is no matter whether thou canst tell of visions and dreams, or talk high of experiences. Where the soul is rooted and grounded in the knowledge of Christ, and love to His ways, though there may be many fears, yet this is an indubitable proof of a real and sincere pilgrim. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They who are acquainted with the manner in which persons are received into Congregational churches, by relating a verbal account of their experience, will recognize in this narrative a resemblance to that practice. Christiana, a grave matron, appears to have felt no difficulty in complying with the requisition; but Mercy, young and inexperienced, blushed and trembled, and for awhile continued silent. Their profession being approved, the readiness of the church to receive them is expressed by the warmest wishes for their spiritual prosperity. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Thou hast given credit to the truth'; what is this but faith—the faith of the operation of God? But some may ask, What! is justifying, saving faith, nothing more than a belief of the truth? If so, the very devils believe; yea, more, they tremble also. True; but mind how Mercy's faith wrought by her works. She fled for refuge to the hope set before her in the Gospel. She fled from sin, from the City of Destruction, to Christ for salvation. Though she had not the joy of faith, yet she followed on to know the Lord, walking in His ways, and hoping for comfort from the Lord in His due time. O! if thou hast a grain of this precious faith in thy heart, bless Jesus for it, and go on thy way rejoicing. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Ivimey considers that this bath in the garden refers to the baptism of the pilgrims by immersion, after having related their experience, as a publicly putting on of Christ. 'And now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord' (Acts 22:16). Innocent says that 'her Master would have them do'; and they went out into the garden to the bath, and were much enlivened by it. Bunyan left it to the convert to act for himself as to water-baptism; all that he required, as a prerequisite to church-communion, was the new birth, or the baptism of the Holy Spirit. He calls this the 'bath of sanctification'; no Christian considers water-baptism a source of sanctification; it is only the outward sign. It must be left to the reader's candid judgment to decide whether baptism, upon a profession of faith, is here intended by that that the Master would have them do. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is no travelling on pilgrimage without gathering soil. There are no pilgrims but daily need to have recourse to this bath of sanctification—the blood of Jesus, which cleanses from all sin (1 John 1:7). Christ is the fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness (Zech. 13:1). Christ is the soul's only bath. As all baths are for the purification of the body, such is this bath to our soul. But unless a bath be used, this cannot be effected; so, unless we have recourse to Christ, we cannot enjoy the purification of the soul; but the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier, convinces us of sin, shows us our fresh-contracted spots and defilements, and leads us to the blood of the Lamb. O how does this enliven and strengthen our souls, by filling our conscience with joy and peace in believing! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baptism and the Lord's Supper I receive and own as signs of the covenant of grace; the former as a sign of our engrafting into Christ, and the latter to show forth His death, as an emblem or type of the benefits purchased thereby to His church and people. <cite>—(Philip Henry, altered by ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This means the sealing of the Spirit, whereby they were sealed unto the day of redemption (Eph. 4:30). O this is blessed sealing! None know the comfort and joy of it but those who have experienced it. It confirms our faith, establishes our hope, and inflames our affections to God the Father for His everlasting love, to God the Son for His everlasting atonement and righteousness, and to God the Spirit for His enlightening mercy, regenerating grace, quickening, sanctifying, testifying, and assuring influences, whereby we know that we are the children of God; for 'the Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God' (Rom. 8:16). All the comfort of our souls lies in keeping this seal clear in our view. Therefore grieve not the Holy Spirit. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They who have put on this raiment are clothed with humility; they readily perceive the excellence of other believers, but can only discern their own in the glass of God's Word. At the same time, they become very observant of their own defects, and severe in condemning them, but proportionally candid to their brethren; and thus they learn the hard lesson of esteeming others better than themselves. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is always the case when souls are clothed in the robe of Christ's righteousness. They are little, low, and mean in their own eyes, and they esteem each other better than themselves; whereas they who at all look to, or depend upon, their own righteousness for their clothing and justification before God, always look down with an air of supercilious contempt upon others who they think are not so righteous as themselves. Lord, hide self-righteous pride from my heart, and sink me into the depth of humility, that I may ever glory in Thee, in whom I am perfectly righteous! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> See also Romans 6:1-5, and Galatians 3:27. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The conductor, named Great-heart, is a Gospel minister under the direction of the Holy Spirit; courageous, armed with the sword of the Spirit, enjoying the hope of salvation, and defended by the shield of faith. <cite>—(Barder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the comfort, joy, and glorying of a pilgrim's heart. Hath Jesus performed righteousness to cover us, and spilled blood to wash us? Have we the faith of this? O how ought we to love Him, rejoice in Him, and study to glorify Him in every step of our pilgrimage! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here Bunyan gives a very clear and distinct account of that righteousness of Christ, as Mediator, which He wrought out by His perfect obedience to the law of God for all His seed. And by this righteousness, and no other, are they fully justified from all condemnation in the sight of God. Reader, study this point deeply, so as to be established in it. It is the essence of the Gospel, enters into the life and joy of faith, brings relief to the conscience, and influence to the love of the Lord our Righteousness; and so brings forth the fruits of righteousness which are by Him to the praise and glory of God, and administers Divine consolation in the hour of death. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Is there righteousness in Christ? That is mine, the believer may say. Did He bleed for sins? It was for mine. Hath He overcome the law, the devil, and hell? The victory is mine. And I do count this a most glorious life?—Sometimes (I bless the Lord) my soul hath this life not only imputed to me, but the glory of it upon my spirit. Upon a time, when I was under many condemnings of heart, and fearing I should miss glory, methought I felt such a secret motion as this—Thy righteousness is in Heaven. The splendour and shining of the Spirit of grace upon my soul, gave me to see clearly that my righteousness, by which I should be justified, was the Son of God Himself representing me before the mercy-seat in His own Person; so that I saw clearly, that day and night, wherever I was, and whatever I was doing, there was my righteousness, just before the eyes of the Divine glory, and continually at the right hand of God. At another time, whilst musing, being afraid to die, these words came upon my soul, 'Being justified freely by His grace, through the redemption which is in Christ.' This stayed my heart. And thus is the sinner made alive from the dead, by being justified through the righteousness of Christ, which is unto all and upon all them that believe. <cite>—(Bunyan's Law and Grace)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sometimes I have been so loaden with my sins, that I could not tell where to rest, nor what to do; yea, at such times, I thought it would have taken away my senses; yet, at that time, God through grace hath all on a sudden so effectually applied the blood that was spilt at Mount Calvary out of the side of Jesus, unto my poor, wounded, guilty conscience, that presently I have found such a sweet, solid, sober, heart-comforting peace, that I have been in a strait to think that I should love and honour Him no more. Sometimes my sins have appeared as big as all the sins of all the men in the nation. <cite>—(reader, these things be not fancies, for I have smarted for this experience); but yet the least stream of the heart-blood Jesus hath vanished all away, and I have been delivered up into sweet and heavenly peace and joy in the Holy Ghost—(Bunyan's Law and Grace, vol. 1, p. 549)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>While the soul lives upon the sweet impressions which are made by the application of the promises, it may be said to live upon frames and feelings; for as its comforts abate, so will its confidence. The heart can never be established in grace, till the understanding is enlightened to discern what it is to have pardon by the deed done. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O brave Christiana! See what it is to have one's heart inflamed with a sense of the love of Christ. Christiana thinks everyone would naturally be affected as she was, if they were present; but she forgets that which she sees and feels is of special, peculiar, distinguishing grace. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Shall I have my sins and lose my soul? Would not Heaven be better to me than my sins?—the company of God, Christ, saints, and angels, than the company of Cain, Judas, Balaam, with the devils, in the furnace of fire? Canst thou now that readest, or hearest these lines, turn thy back, and go on in thy sins? <cite>—(Bunyan's Law and Grace, vol. 1, p. 575)</cite> Reader, thus would Christiana plead with ungodly relatives and friends; and if thou art in such a case, wilt thou not listen to such a plea? <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mind how tenderly Great-heart deals with warm-hearted Christiana. He does not attempt to throw cold water upon the fire of her affections, but gently insinuates, 1. The peculiar frame of the mind she speaks from; 2. Suggests that she must not always expect to be in such raptures; and, 3. Reminds her that her indulgences were of a peculiar nature, not common to all, but bestowed upon the faithful in Christ only; and that, therefore, amidst all her joyful feelings, she should know to whom she was indebted for them, and give all the glory to the God of all grace. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Simple, contented in gross ignorance; Sloth, an indolence which smothers all conviction; Presumption, carnal security, which hardens against reproof. <cite>—(Andronicus)</cite> These are the great opposers of vital religion. The end of these things is death. <cite>—(Barder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was a custom, to a late period, to hang up murderers in irons, until the body dropped to pieces; that such terrible examples might deter others from the like crimes; hence, under the old wood-cut illustrating this passage, is written—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Behold here how the slothful are a sign,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hung up, because holy ways they did decline.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—(ED). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>God, as it were, gibbets some professors, and causes their names and characters to be publicly exhibited, as a terror to others, and as a warning to His own people. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> The dreadful falls and awful deaths of some professors are to put others upon their guard against superficial, slothful, and presumptuous hopes. The real occasion of turning aside lies in the concealed lusts of the heart. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Let us consider the characters of these three professors: 1. Here is a Simple, a foolish credulous professor, ever learning, but never coming to the knowledge of the truth, so as to believe it, love it, and be established on it; hence liable to be carried away by every wind of doctrine. 2. Sloth, a quiet, easy professor, who never disturbs anyone by his diligence in the Word of God, nor his zeal for the truths and glory of God. 3. Presumption, one who expects salvation in the end, without the means prescribed by God for attaining it. O beware of these three sorts of professors, for they turn many aside! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What is meant by the Hill Difficulty? Christiana has set out from Destruction, been received and encouraged at the wicket-gate, and directed on her journey. The path is comparatively easy, until she is about to put on a public profession, by joining a church. This is situated upon the summit of this hill of difficult ascent. Is it intended to represent that prayerful, watchful, personal investigation into Divine truth, which ought to precede church-fellowship? Nothing is more difficult to flesh and blood than to be compelled, upon pain of endless ruin, to think for ourselves on matters of religion. The formalist and hypocrite follow the persuasions of man, and take an easier path, and are lost. The fear of man causes some to abandon the ascent. Dr. Cheever has, in his Hill Difficulty, very happily described the energy that is needful to enable the pilgrim to make the ascent. He forcibly proves the utter impossibility of making the ascent by ceremonial observances, or while encumbered with worldly cares or pride in trinkets of gold and costly array. He reminds us of the solemn advice of Peter, 'be ye built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.' Every weight must be set aside, and salvation must be worked out with fear and trembling. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The river of life is pure and clear as crystal. Is the doctrine offered to thee so? Or is it muddy, and mixed with the doctrines of men? Look, man, and see, if the foot of the worshippers of Baal be not there, and the water fouled thereby. What water is fouled is not the water of life, or at least not in its clearness. Wherefore, if thou findest it not right, go up higher towards the spring-head, for nearer the spring the more pure and clear is the water. <cite>—(Bunyan's Water of Life)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This represents to us that some preachers, as the Prophet says, foul the water with their feet (Ezek. 24:18); that is, though they preach somewhat about Christ, and salvation by Him, yet they so clog, mire, and pollute the stream of free grace, with pre-requisites, terms, and conditions, that the poor thirsty soul cannot drink the water, nor allay his thirst with it; but is forced to let it stand, till these gross dregs sink to the bottom. Yea, we ought to beware of drinking such filthy dregs; for they will certainly swell us up with the company of pride of our free will, human merit, and self-righteousness, which oppose the glory of Jesus, and comfort of our souls. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Although the cautious of Holy Writ are plain as posts and chains, and the warnings as a ditch, and the solemn threatenings of the New Testament against pharisaic formalism and hypocrisy are like a hedge, to prevent pilgrims wandering into paths that end in eternal misery, yet there are many who break through all these merciful restraints, and rush upon destruction. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Examine, which do you like better, self-soothing or soul-searching doctrine? Formalists and hypocrites love the former, and hate the latter. But the sincere and upright are discovered by desiring to have their hearts searched to the quick, and their ways tried to the utmost; and, therefore, with David will cry, 'Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting' (Psa. 129:23, 24). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Heart-work is hard work; it is hard work to be stripped; it is hard work to deny self, take up your cross, and follow Jesus. It is hard work to fight the fight of faith; it is hard work against hope to believe in hope. A formalist and hypocrite will go, in outward things, as far as the real Christian; but touch him on the inward work, and he will start aside. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He who is a stranger to the hard work of self-denial, and how difficult it is to the flesh, knows not what this Hill Difficulty means; for the nearer to the arbour of Jesus' rest, the more difficulties in the way, but the sweeter it is when attained. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Regard not in thy pilgrimage how difficult the passage is, but whither it tends; not how delicate the journey is, but where it ends. If it be easy, suspect it; if hard, endure it. He that cannot excuse a bad way, accuseth his own sloth; and he that sticks in a bad passage, can never attain a good journey's end. <cite>—(Quarles' Enchiridion)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There were stairs in the temple, and but one pair, and these winding. He that went up must turn with the stairs. This is a type of a twofold repentance; that by which we turn from nature to grace, and that by which we turn from the imperfections of a state of grace to glory. But this turning and turning still, displeases some much. They say it makes them giddy; but I say, Nothing like this to make a man steady. A straight stair is like the ladder that leads to the gallows. They are turning stairs that lead to the heavenly mansion. Stay not at their foot; but go up them, and up them, and up them, till you come to Heaven. <cite>—(Bunyan's Solomon's Temple)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When we are praised, a conscious blush should pervade us, well knowing how much we have to be ashamed of. But some have got such vain confidence in their own righteousness, merits, and perfection, that they have hereby got what the Scriptures call a whore's forehead, and refuse to be ashamed (Jer. 3:3). O cry to the Lord continually against spiritual pride, and for an humble heart, knowing thyself to be a poor sinner! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eve looking first into those worthy privileges which God had given her, and dilating delightfully of them before the devil, she lost the dread of the command from off her heart, which Satan perceiving, now added to his former forged doubt a plain and flat denial—'Ye shall not surely die.' When people dally with the devil, and sit too near their outward advantages, they fall into temptation. <cite>—(Bunyan on Genesis, vol. 2, p. 429)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reader, mind this well, remember it often, and it will do thee good. I am a witness against myself, of how much I have lost by indulging the flesh, and how much I have suffered by forgetfulness. But O what a gracious Lord do we serve! this is no excuse for our folly, but an aggravation of our faults; and ought to sink us lower in shame, and to excite us to greater care, diligence, and watchfulness; else we shall surely smart for our folly, if not in hell, yet in our consciences. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may refer to the awful end of one of Bunyan's early friends, who became a notorious apostate—one John Child, whose sufferings were published with those of Spira. Child was so afraid of persecution, as to give up his profession; and then, overwhelmed by despair, he committed suicide. Or to such an one as the professor, in the Marian days, who recanted to save burning, but who was burnt to death by his house catching fire. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is not very easy to determine the precise idea of the author in each of the giants who assault the Pilgrims, and are slain by the conductor and his assistants. Some have supposed that unbelief is here meant, but Grim or Bloody-man seem not to be opposite names for this inward foe; nor can it be conceived, that unbelief should more violently assault those who are under the care of a valiant conductor, than it had done the solitary pilgrims. I apprehend, therefore, that this giant was intended for the emblem of certain active men who busied themselves in framing and executing persecuting statutes, which was done at the time when this was written, more violently than it had been before. Thus the temptation to fear man, which at all times assaults the believer when required to make an open profession of his faith, was exceedingly increased; and as heavy fines and severe penalties, in accession to reproach and contempt, deterred men from joining themselves in communion with dissenting churches, that way was almost unoccupied, and the travelers went through bypaths, according to the author's sentiments on the subject. But the preaching of the Gospel, by which the ministers of Christ wielded the sword of the Spirit, overcame this enemy; for the example and exhortations of such courageous combatants animated even weak believers to overcome their fears, and to act according to their consciences, leaving the event to God. This seems to have been the author's meaning; and perhaps he also intended to encourage his brethren boldly to persevere in resisting such persecuting statutes, confidently expecting that they should prevail for the repeal of them; by which, as by the death of the giant, the pilgrims might be freed from additional terror, in acting consistently with their avowed principles. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This reminds us of the words of Mr. Godly-fear to Diabolus, when Captain Credence sent a petition to Immanuel for mercy—'We are resolved to resist thee as long as a captain, a man, a sling, or a stone shall be found in Mansoul to throw at thee. Then said the Lord Mayor to Diabolus, O thou devouring tyrant, be it known to thee, we shall hearken to none of thy words!'. <cite>—(Bunyan's Holy War)</cite> Happy are the Godly-fears and Great-hearts who use such decided language to the enemy of souls. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sincere and earnest Christiana, at this time, had a proverbial expression—'It is better that the body should die to this world by the lions without, than that body and soul should die eternally by our lusts within.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O pilgrims, when dangers beset you, and fears arise in you, hear what the Lord speaks to you; and in the belief of his truth, quit yourselves manfully: 'Fight the good fight of faith,' ever remembering that 'you are more than conquerors through Christ who hath loved you!' Faith will exalt the love and power of Christ above the fear of every enemy. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O pilgrim, it is sweet to reflect that every lion-like foe is under the control of thy God, and cannot come one link of the chain nearer to thee than thy Lord will permit! Therefore, when fears and terrors beset thee, think of thy Lord's love to thee, His power engages to preserve thee, and His promises to comfort thee. For 'the Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon Him' (Psa. 145:18). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the deeply interesting narrative of the experience of Mr. Fearing, it is plain that the lions and their backer, Giant Grim or Bloody-man, relates entirely to temporal troubles; most likely to those infamous penal statutes under which Dissenters so severely suffered. The uniting in church-fellowship was not only attended with the ordinary difficulties, but with danger from the lions—church and state; especially when backed by ferocious judges, such as Jefferies and others. Spiritual enemies—sin, death, and hell—were the only terrors under which Mr. Fearing suffered; temporal persecutions—'difficulties, lions, or Vanity Fair—he feared not at all.' The battle probably refers to the flimsy sophistry used in defence of persecution, as opposed to the Word of God, the sword of the Spirit, by which our Puritan heroes destroyed these anti-Christian arguments. <cite>—(ED)</cite> Now that the lions are removed, may we not fear that hypocrites will thrust themselves into our churches? It is easy, cheap, and almost fashionable, to be religious: this should promote solemn investigation. <cite>—(Andronicus)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How mindful is our Lord of us! How gracious is He to us! What blessed provision doth He make for us! If pilgrims are attacked by Giant Grim, and terrified with the sight of lions, they may be sure that it is only a prelude to some sweet enjoyment of their Lord's love, and that they are near to some asylum, some sanctuary of rest, peace, and comfort. Some bitter generally precedes the sweet, and makes the sweet the sweeter. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O it is hard work to part with Great-heart! How many blessings do we lose for want of asking! Great-heart is at the command of our Lord. O for more power to cry incessantly to the Lord for the presence of Great-heart, that we may go on more cheerfully and more joyfully in the ways of the Lord! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is a blessed mark of being vessels of the grace of God, when we delight in the sight of, salute, and welcome others in the way to Zion, and mutually have our hearts and affections drawn out to each other in love. O how sweet is the fellowship of pilgrims below! What must it be above? Infinitely above conception. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reader, can you feed upon Christ by faith? Is the Lamb the nourishment of thy soul, and the portion of thy heart? Canst thou say, from blessed experience, 'His flesh is meat indeed, and His blood is drink indeed?' Is it thy delight to think of Him, hear of Him, speak of Him, abide in Him, and live upon Him? O bless Him and praise Him for His distinguishing mercy, this spiritual appetite! It is peculiar to His beloved ones only. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pray mind the above note, 'Christ's bosom is for all pilgrims.' [This is the room in which they all lay, and its name is Peace—ED]. It is there the weary find rest, and the burdened soul ease. O for more reclinings of soul upon the precious bosom of our Lord! We can be truly happy nowhere else. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Immanuel also made a feast for them. He feasted them with food that grew not in the fields of Mansoul, nor in the whole kingdom of the Universe. It came from the Father's court. There was music also all the while at the table, and man did eat angels' food. I must not forget to tell you, that the musicians were the masters of the songs sung at the court of Shaddai. <cite>—(Bunyan's Holy War)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O what precious harmony is this! How joyful to be the subjects of it, and to join in it! The free, sovereign grace of God is the delightful theme, and glory to God in the highest the universal chorus. It is the wonder and joy of sinners on earth, and of angels in Heaven. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our author intimates that God sometimes communicates spiritual knowledge and heavenly joy by 'dreams and visions of the night.' The Holy One 'worketh all things after the counsel of His own will,' and employs what means He pleases to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. The effect produced by dreams must be brought to this test. It is a good maxim, that what leads to God, must have come from God. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If Mercy were sweetly surprised with this dream, we are sure that nothing but the surprise of mercy can overcome the hardened sinner's heart, who, expecting the stroke of justice, instead of the executioner with a death-warrant, finds a messenger of peace, with a pardon free and full, revealing the grace, mercy, and love of God, through the redemption which there is in the love of God. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O how blessed are they who are watching and waiting continually to hear the small, still voice of the Spirit, speaking rest and peace to their souls by the blood of the Lamb! O how condescending is our Lord, thus to visit us, and converse with us in the way to his kingdom! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> And how blessed is church fellowship when the members are governed by these heavenly principles, watchfulness, humility of mind, prudence, piety, and charity. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The assurance that the dream should he accomplished, is grounded on the effects produced upon Mercy's heart; there is no danger of delusion, when so scriptural an encouragement is inferred even from a dream. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Can we wonder that the pilgrims longed to spend some time with such lovely companions? Reader, how is your inclination? Add to these 'Simplicity, Innocence, and Godly-sincerity; without which three graces thou wilt be a hypocrite, let thy notions, thy knowledge, thy profession, and commendations from others, be what they will.'. <cite>—(Holy Life, vol. 2, p. 539)</cite> Christian, in choosing thy companions, specially cleave to these six virgins, for they not only have very comely and sober countenances, but Christ dwells with them. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When Christiana was admitted into the church, care was taken to inquire into the religious knowledge of her children. This is an important branch of ministerial and parental duty. The answers given by the children do their mother honour, and prove that she had not laboured in vain. Let every pious parent imitate her example, and hope for her success. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a very sensible mode of catechising the boys according to their ages and acquirements, with questions, exciting their attention to subjects of the gravest importance. Compare this with the custom of asking a child its name, and requiring it to narrate circumstances which took place in the time of unconscious babyhood; instead of impressing upon it the existence of God and the solemn realities of eternity. The Assembly's, Dr. Watts', and especially Bunyan's catechisms, are admirably adapted to assist a parent in these important and responsible exercises. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The young pupil is not here taught to answer, 'all the elect,' but practically 'those that accept of His salvation.' This is perfectly consistent with the other, while it instructs and encourages the learner without perplexing him. It is absurd to teach the hardest lessons to the youngest scholars in the school of Christ. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though this is answered with the simplicity of a child; yet it is, and ever will be, the language of every father in Christ. Happy those whose spirits are cast into this humble, evangelical mold! O that this Spirit may accompany us in all our researches, in all our ways, and through all our days! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Our inability to discover the meaning of these passages should teach us humility, and submission to the decisions of our infallible Instructor. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is the foundation of faith, and the triumph of hope, God's faithfulness to His promise, and His power to perform. Having these to look to, what should stagger our faith, or deject our hope? We may, we ought to smile at all carnal objections, and trample upon all corrupt reasonings. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is an important lesson to young females, how they may profitably employ their time, adorn the Gospel, and be useful. It is much better to imitate Dorcas, in making garments for the poor, than to waste time and money in frivolous amusements, or needless decorations; or in more elegant and fashionable accomplishments. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character of Mr. Brisk is portrayed to the life in Bunyan's Emblems—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Candles that do blink within the socket,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And saints whose eyes are always in their pocket,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Are much alike: such candles make us fumble;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And at such saints, good men and bad do stumble.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character of Mercy is lovely throughout the pilgrimage; but in the important choice of a partner for life, she manifests great prudence and shrewdness; she asks the advice of those who knew Mr. Brisk, and whose names proved how capable they were to give it. And she acted upon their knowledge of his character. And when she discovered the utter selfishness of his disposition, she thankfully bid him, Good bye, sweet heart; and parts for life. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most blessed resolution! Ah, pilgrims, if ye were more wary, lest, by your choice and conduct, ye brought clogs to your souls, how many troubles would ye escape, and how much more happy would you be in your pilgrimage! It is for want of this wisdom and conduct, that many bring evil upon themselves. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How easily are the best of characters traduced, and false constructions put upon the best of actions! Reader, is this your lot also? Mind your duty. Look to your Lord. Persevere in His works and ways; and leave your character with Him, to whom you can trust your soul. 'For if God be for us, who shall be against us? what shall harm us, if we be followers of that which is good?'. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Crying at the cross, and turning a wife out of doors, refers to a vulgar error, which had its influence to a late period in Bedfordshire. It was a speedy mode of divorce, similar to that practised in London, by leading a wife by a halter to Smithfield, and selling her. The crying at the market cross that a man would not be answerable for the debts that might be incurred by his wife, was the mode of advertising, which was supposed to absolve a husband from maintaining his wife; a notion now fully exploded. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the effects of sin. It will pinch and gripe the conscience, and make the heart of a gracious soul sick. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Matthew, in being admitted a member of the church, represented by the house Beautiful and its happy family, had to relate his experience, and this brought to his recollection plashing the trees, and eating the enemy's fruit, of which his brother also reminds them. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How often do we suffer by neglecting the cautions of a pious parent or friend. 'In time of temptation it is our duty to keep close to the Word, then we have Satan at the end of the staff. When Eve was tempted, she went to the outside of her liberty, and sat herself on the brink of danger, when she said, we may eat of all but one.'. <cite>—(Bunyan on Genesis, vol. 2, p. 429)</cite> Christiana had chided the boys: 'You transgress, for that fruit is none of ours.' Still the boys went on, and now Matthew feels the bitterness of repentance. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Although the mother did warn and chide her son, yet she did not use her authority to prevent his taking the fruit which belonged to another. She takes the fault home, falls under the sense of it, and is grieved for it. A tender conscience is a blessed sign of a gracious heart. Ye parents, who know the love of Christ, watch over your children; see to it, lest you smart for your sins, in not warning and preventing them, that 'the fear of the Lord is to depart from all evil'; yea, to abstain from the very appearance of it. <cite>—(Mason, altered by ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Bunyan's great modesty and humility are truly admirable; he quotes Latin, but is careful to tell us, 'The Latin I borrow' [in his notes]. The English is, 'Of the flesh and of the blood of Christ.' This is the only portion for sin-sick souls. Feeding upon Christ's flesh and blood by faith, keeps us from sinning, and when sick of sin, these, and nothing but these, can heal and restore us. Yet there is in our nature an unaccountable reluctance to receive these, through the unbelief which works in us. So Matthew found it. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the blessed effects of receiving Christ, when under the sense of sin, and distressed for sin. O what a precious Saviour is Jesus! What efficacy is there in His flesh and blood, to purge the conscience from guilt! Lord, what a mercy is it, that though we sin, yet Thou art abundant to pardon, yea, multipliest Thy pardons; yea, and also giveth poor, pained, broken-hearted sinners to know and feel Thy pardoning love! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How correctly are the effects of an indulgence in sinful lusts described. Sin and sorrow are inseparable. The burdened conscience of a backslider can be relieved in no other way, than that in which it was first 'purged from dead works,' by exercising faith in the atoning blood of the Lord Jesus as the only sacrifice for sin, 'If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness' (Gal. 6:1). 'Flee youthful lusts,' and be upon your guard against the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The relation of Matthew's sickness, and the method of his cure, may be justly esteemed among the finest passages of this work. He ate the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard, sin, the disease of the soul, threatening eternal death. It is an unspeakable mercy to be exceedingly pained with it. Such need the physician, and the remedy is at hand.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Nothing but Thy blood, O Jesus!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Can relieve us from our smart;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nothing else from guilt release us</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nothing else can melt the heart</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Hart)</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>It is the universal medicine; blessed are those that will never take any other physic <cite>—(Burder)</cite>. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This advice should be carefully noted. Numbers abuse the doctrine of free salvation by the merits and redemption of Christ, and presume on forgiveness, when they are destitute of genuine repentance, and give no evidence of sanctification. But this most efficacious medicine in that case will do no good; or rather, the perverse abuse of it will increase their guilt, and tend to harden their hearts in sin. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bunyan's bill of his Master's water of life—'As men, in their bills, do give an account of the persons cured, and the diseases removed, so could I give you account of numberless numbers that have not only been made to live, but to live forever, by drinking this pure water of life. No disease comes amiss to it. It cures blindness, deafness, dumbness, deadness. This right holy water (all other is counterfeit) will drive away evil spirits. It will make you have a white soul, and that is better than a white skin.'. <cite>—(Bunyan's Water of Life)</cite> Whoever offers to purify the heart, and heal a wounded conscience, by any other means, is a deceiver and a soul-destroyer. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This conversation is adapted for the meditation of a restored backslider. Evangelical truth prescribes the most powerful antidotes to presumption and despair—'My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous' (1 John 2:1). <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Having experienced the great advantage of a pious minister or elder, they were naturally desirous of having such comfort through their pilgrimage. The petition may refer to the custom, among dissenting churches, of letters of dismission given to members when they move to a distant locality. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How much is contained in that answer of Christiana as to the origin of evil—'It is food or poison, I know not which!' To believers, it will be their elevation to a degree of bliss that they would never have otherwise enjoyed; to the faithless, it will be poison of the deadliest kind. Here is no attempt to explain the origin of evil in our world; a subject far beyond all our powers of investigation. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is not enough that the Holy Spirit convince us of sin at our first setting out on pilgrimage, and makes us sensible of our want of Christ; but He also keeps up a sight and sense of the evil of sin in its original nature, as well as actual transgressions. This often makes us wonder at sin, at ourselves, and at the love of Christ in becoming a sacrifice for our sins. And this also humbles us, makes us hate sin the more; and makes Christ, His atonement, and righteousness, more and more precious in our eyes, and inestimable in our hearts. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ministration of angels is an animating theme to believers, and is well adapted to promote their confidence in the care and protection of God. 'Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?' (Heb. 1:14). <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the anchor of hope. This keeps the soul safe, and steady to Jesus, who is the alone object of our hopes. Hope springs from faith. It is an expectation of the fulfillment of those things that are promised in the Word of truth, by the God of all grace. Faith receives them, trusts in them, relies upon them; and hope waits for the full accomplishment and enjoyment of them. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bunyan loved harmony—he had a soul for music. But whether he intended by this to sanction the introduction of instrumental music into public worship, is not clear. 'The late Abraham Booth and Andrew Fuller were extremely averse to it; others are as desirous of it. Music has a great effect on the nervous system, and of all instruments the organ is the most impressive. The Christian's inquiry is, whether sensations so produced assist the soul in holding communion with the Father of spirits, or whether, under our spiritual dispensation, the Holy Ghost makes use of such means to promote intercourse between our spirits and the unseen hierarchies of Heaven. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O how reviving and refreshing are those love-tokens from our Lord! Great-heart never comes empty-handed. He always inspires with courage and confidence. Let us look more into, and heartily believe the Word of truth and grace; and cry more to our precious Immanuel, and we shall have more of Great-heart's company. It is but sad travelling without him. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What this great robbery was, whether spiritual or temporal, is left to the reader to imagine. The sufferings of the Dissenters were awfully severe at this time. Had it been a year later, we might have guessed it to have referred to the sufferings of that pious, excellent woman, Elizabeth Gaunt, who was burnt, October 23, 1685. She was a Baptist, and cruelly martyred. Penn, the Quaker, saw her die. 'She laid the straw about her for burning her speedily, and behaved herself in such a manner that all the spectators melted in tears.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Ivimey is of opinion that by this Bunyan sanctioned a hireling ministry, but it appears more to refer to the common custom of rewarding servants to whom you have given trouble. He adduces Luke 10:7; 1 Timothy 5:18; and 1 Corinthians 9:11-14. It is a subject of considerable difficulty; but how is it that no minister ever thinks of referring to the plainest passage upon this subject in the New Testament? It is Acts 20:17-38, especially verses 33-35. The angel was a gold coin, in value half a sovereign. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Such mountains round about this house do stand</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As one from thence may see the Holy Land (Psa. 125:2).</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her fields are fertile, do abound with corn;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The lilies fair her valleys do adorn (Song. 2:1).</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The birds that do come hither every spring,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For birds, they are the very best that sing (Song. 2:11, 12).</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Her friends, her neighbours too, do call her blest (Psa. 48:2);</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Angels do here go by, turn in, and rest (Heb. 13:2).</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The road to paradise lies by her gate (Gen. 28:17),</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here pilgrims do themselves accommodate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With bed and board; and do such stories tell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As do for truth and profit all excel.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor doth the porter here say any nay,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That hither would turn in, that here would stay.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This house is rent free; here the man may dwell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That loves his landlord, rules his passions well.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Bunyan's House of God, vol. 2 p. 579).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is sweet melody when we can sing with grace in the heart. The joy arising from God's free grace and pardoning love, is greater than the joy of harvest, or of one who rejoices when he divides the spoil. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> Those joyful notes spring from a sense of nearness to the Lord, and a firm confidence in His Divine truth and everlasting mercy. O when the Sun of Righteousness shines warmly on the soul, it makes the pilgrims sing most sweetly! These songs approach very nearly to the heavenly music in the realm of glory. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Forgetfulness makes things nothings. It makes us as if things had never been; and so takes away from the soul one great means of stay, support, and encouragement. When David was dejected, the remembrance of the hill Hermon was his stay. When he was to go out against Goliath, the remembrance of the lion and the bear was his support. The recovery of a backslider usually begins at the remembrance of former things. <cite>—(Bunyan's Holy Life, vol. 2, p. 507)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After being thus highly favoured with sensible comforts, in the views of faith, the comforts of hope, and the joy of love, the next step these pilgrims are to take is down the Hill Difficulty, into the Valley of Humiliation. What doth this place signify? A deep and abiding sight and sense of our ruined state, lost condition, and desperate circumstances, as fallen sinners. This is absolutely necessary, lest we should think more highly of ourselves than we ought to think. For the Lord oft favours us with manifestations of His love, and the comforts of His Spirit; but, through the corruption of our nature, we are prone to be exalted in ourselves, and, as it were, intoxicated by them. Hence we are exhorted 'to think soberly' (Rom. 12:3). This the Valley of Humiliation causes us to do. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus beautifully does our author describe the grace of humility. O that every reader may know its excellence by happy experience! <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These are the rare times; above all, when I can go to God as the Publican, sensible of His glorius majesty, sensible of my misery, and bear up and affectionately cry, 'God be merciful to me a sinner.' For my part, I find it one of the hardest things I can put my soul upon, when warmly sesnsible that I am a sinner, to come to God for a share in mercy and grace; I cannot but with a thousand tears say, 'God be merciful to me a sinner.'. <cite>—(Bunyan's Pharisee and Publican, vol. 2, p. 261)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Though this Valley of Humiliation, or a clear sight and abiding sense of the sinfulness of our nature, and the wickedness of our hearts, may be very terrifying to pilgrims, after they have been favoured with peace and joy, and comforted by the views of faith and hope, yet it is a very safe place; and though, at first entering into it, and seeing more of themselves than was ever before showed them, they may fear and tremble, yet, after some continuing here, they are more reconciled and contented; for here they find the visits of their Lord, and in the depths of their humility, they behold the heights of His love and the depths of His mercy, and cry out in joy, Where sin aboundeth, grace superabounds. Though sin abounds in me, the grace of Jesus superabounds towards me. Though I am emptied of all, yet I have an inexhaustible fullness in Jesus, to supply me with all I want and all I hope. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The humble man is contented; if his estate be low, his heart is lower still. He that is little in his own eyes, will not be much troubled at being little in the eyes of others. <cite>—(Watson)</cite> Those circumstances that will not disturb a humble man's sleep, will break a proud man's heart. <cite>—(Matthew Henry)</cite> They that get slips in going down the hill, or would hide his descent by deception, or repine at it, must look for combats when in the valley. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Perhaps the shepherd's boy may refer to the obscure but quiet station of some pastors over small congregations, who live almost unknown to their brethren, but are, in a measure, useful and very comfortable. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our Lord chose retirement, poverty, and an obscure station; remote from bustle, and favourable to devotion; so that His appearance in a public character, and in crowded scenes, for the good of mankind and the glory of the Father, was a part of His self-denial, in which 'He pleased not Himself.' Some are banished into this valley, but the poor in spirit love to walk in it; and though some believers here struggle with distressing temptations, others, in passing through it, enjoy much communion with God. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ever remember the words of our Lord, 'It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master.' If your Lord made it his chief delight to be in this Valley of Humiliation, learn from His example to prize this valley. Though you may meet with an Apollyon or a destroyer here, yet you are safe in the arms and under the power of your all-conquering Lord: 'For though the Lord is high, yet hath He respect unto the lowly.' Therefore you may add with David, 'Though I walk in the midst of trouble, Thou wilt revive me: Thou shalt stretch forth Thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and Thy right hand shall save me' (Psa. 138:7). Such are the confidence, the reasoning, and the pleading of humble souls in the power of faith, which leads them quite out of themselves to their Lord. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the first edition this name is printed 'Simon'; it was corrected to Samuel in Bunyan's later editions. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is marvellous to see how some men are led captive by forgetfulness. Those that sometime thought no pains too much, no way too far, no hazards too great to run for eternal life, become as if they had never thought of such things. Should one say to some—Art not thou that man I saw crying out under a sermon, 'What shall I do to be saved?' that I heard speak well of the holy Word of God? how askew they will look upon one. Or if they acknowledge that such things were with them once, they do it more like dejected ghosts than as men. <cite>—(Bunyan's Holy Life, vol. 2, p. 507)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O pilgrims, attend to this! Pride and ingratitude go hand in hand. Study, ever study the favours of your Lord; how freely they are bestowed upon you, and how utterly unworthy you are of the least of them. Beware of Forgetful Green. Many, after going some way on pilgrimage, get into this Green, and continue here; and talk of their own faithfulness to grace received, the merit of their works, and a second justification by their works, &amp;c. Hence it is plain that they are fallen asleep on this Forgetful Green, and talk incoherently, as men do in their sleep; for they forget that they are still sinners—poor, needy, wretched sinners; and that they want the blood of Christ to cleanse them, the righteousness of Christ to justify them, and the Spirit of Christ to keep them humble, and to enable them to live by faith upon the fullness of Christ to sanctify them, as much as they did when they first set out as pilgrims. O it is a most blessed thing to be kept mindful of what we are, and of the Lord's free grace and unmerited goodness to us! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Trembles at God's Word,' so as not to dare pick and choose which doctrines he will receive, and which reject. Would you act thus by God's holy commandments? Would you choose one and reject another? Are they not all of equal authority? And are not all His holy doctrines also stamped with the same Divine sanction? Where there is true faith in them, it will make a man tremble to act thus by God's Word! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We ought to study the records of the temptations, conflicts, faith, patience, and victories of believers; mark their wounds, by what misconduct they were occasioned, that we may watch and pray lest we fall in like manner. Learn how they repelled the assaults of the tempter, that we may learn to resist him steadfast in the faith. Their triumphs should animate us to keep on the whole armour of God, that we may be able to withstand in the evil day. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If Satan be driven back from one attack, prepare for another. Bless God for your armour. Never put it off. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If this monument refers to the experience of Bunyan, as exhibited in his Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners, it is well called, 'Most strange, and yet most true.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This valley represents the inward distress, conflict, and alarm, arising from darkness and insensibility of mind. It varies according to the constitution, animal spirits, health, education, and strength of mind of different persons. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>None know the distress, anguish, and fear that haunt pilgrims in this valley, but those who have been in it. The hissings, revilings, and injections of that old serpent, with all his infernal malice, seem to be let loose upon pilgrims in this valley. Asaph seems to be walking in this valley when he says, 'As for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped' (Psa. 73:2). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Satan is often must dreadful at a distance, and, courageously resisted, will not advance nearer. This advice is ever needful, 'Be sober; be vigilant.' These pilgrims kept up their watch. Satan did come upon them unawares; still they heard his approach; they were prepared for his attack; lo, Satan drew back. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miserable, uncomfortable walking, with a pit before us, mid darkness around, yea, within us, and hell seeming to move from beneath to meet us who have been left to the darkness of our nature, the terrors of a fiery law, the sense of guilt, and the fear of hell! O what an unspeakable mercy, in such a distressing season, to have an Almighty Saviour to look to and call upon for safety and salvation! 'For He will hear our cry and save us' (Psa. 145:19). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This text has been a sheet anchor to my soul under darkness and distress. I doubt not but it has been so to many others. O there is an amazing depth of grace and a wonderful height of mercy in it. Bless God for it. Study it deeply. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What must the pure and holy Jesus have suffered when He tasted death in all its bitterness? His soul was in an agony. Hell was let loose upon Him. This is your hour, said He, and the power of darkness, when He cried out, 'My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?' It seemed as if the pains of hell had got hold of Him. O what justice and judgment! what love and mercy! what power and might were here displayed! And all this for us, and for our salvation. What shall we render to the Lord for all His benefits? <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Precious thought; under the worst and most distressing circumstances think of this. Their continuance is short. The appointment, love. Their end shall be crowned with glory. Our dark and distressing nights make us prize our light and joyful days the more. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tremendous horrors of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, figuratively represents the gloomy frame of mind in which fears rise high, and temptations greatly abound, more especially when they are augmented by bodily disease. Few Christians are wholly exempted from such distressing seasons, but all are not distressed alike. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> Bunyan's experience, recorded in his Grace Abounding, shows that he was, when under conviction, very familiar with these horrors. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Heedless professors, be warned. The doctrines of grace were never intended to lull any asleep in carnal security. If they do so by you, it is a sure sign that what should have been for your health proves an occasion of your falling. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> O the miserable end of them that obey not the Gospel—punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of His power. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Prayer prevailed, and they were delivered.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By glimm'ring hopes, and gloomy fears,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We trace the sacred road;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Through dismal deeps, and dang'rous snares,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We make our way to God</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Burder).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By a good heart is here meant, that Christian was endued with boldness and courage from above; as the Psalmist says, 'Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and He shall strengthen thine heart.'. <cite>—(J. B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Satan's master argument is, Thou art a horrible sinner, a hypocrite, one that has a profane heart, and one that is an utter stranger to a work of grace. I say this is his Maul, his club, his master-piece. He doth with this as some do by their most enchanting songs, sings them everywhere. I believe there are but few saints in the world that have not had this temptation sounding in their ears. But were they but aware, Satan by all this does but drive them to the gap, out at which they should go, and so escape his roaring. Saith he, Thou art a great sinner, a horrible sinner, a profane-hearted wretch, one that cannot be matched for a vile one in the country. The tempted may say, Aye, Satan, so I am, a sinner of the biggest size, and, therefore, have most need of Jesus Christ; yea, because I am such a wretch Jesus calls me first. I am he, wherefore stand back, Satan, make a lane; my right is first to come to Jesus Christ. This, now, would be like for like; this would foil the devil: this would make him say, I must not deal with this man thus; for then I put a sword into his hand to cut off my head. <cite>—(Good News for the Vilest of Men, vol. 1, p 96)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The greatest heart cannot understand without prayer, nor conquer without the almighty power of God. The belief of this will excite prayer. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The severity of Job's sufferings probably suggested to the author, the idea of taking rest during the conflict. 'How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?' (Job 7:19). Here is no timidly mincing the matter with sophistry or infidelity; but a manful, prayerful, fighting it out. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Ivimey considers, that in Giant Maul is characterised that erroneous but common notion, that the church of Christ consists exclusively of some one state religion, to dissent from which is to cause schism, and to rend the seamless coat of Christ. Maul dwelt in the place where Pagan and Pope had resided; the club being the temporal power to compel uniformity. If so, the declaration for liberty of conscience slew the giant, and the Act of toleration prevented his resurrection. Alas, how little do such Anti-Christians know of that spiritual kingdom which extends over all the temporal kingdoms of the earth, and which constitutes Christ the King of kings. <cite>—(ED)</cite> Carnal reasoning upon the equity of the Divine proceedings have mauled many a Christian—robbed him of his comfort, and spoiled his simplicity. As soon as we turn aside to vain janglings and doubtful disputations, we get upon the devil's ground. As Great-heart was knocked down with this giant's club, so many a faithful minister has been confounded with the subtle arguments of a cunning disputer. The way to overcome this giant is to keep close to Scripture, and pray for the teaching of the Holy Spirit. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> Though Maul was baffled, disabled, and apparently slain; it will appear that he has left a posterity on earth to revile, injure, and oppose the spiritual worshippers of God in every generation. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Well may Giant Maul, with his sophistry, be called a dangerous enemy. Many of this tribe are mentioned in the Holy War, as Lord Cavil, the Lord Brisk, the Lord Pragmatic, the Lord Murmur, and one Clip-promise, a notorious villain. These lords felt the edge of Lord Will-be-will's sword, for which his Prince Immanuel honoured him. Clip-promise was set in the pillory, whipped, and hanged. One clipper-of-promise does great abuse to Mansoul in a little time. Bunyan's judgment was, that 'all those of his name and life should be served even as he!'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Light afflictions, but for a moment, and which work out for us an eternal weight of glory—'a little hurt on my flesh.' If this refers to Bunyan's twelve years' imprisonment under the maul of sophistry, how must his natural temper have been subdued by humility! <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This club we may suppose to mean human power, under which many godly ministers, in the seventeenth century, suffered greatly. Blessed be God, we have nothing of this to fear in our day; therefore, the more shame for such professors who desert Christ when they have nothing to fear but the breath of reproach, a nickname, or a by-word of contempt. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The experienced Christian will be afraid of new acquaintance; in his most unwatchful seasons he is fully convinced that no enemy can hurt him, unless he is induced to yield to temptation, and commit sin. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character of Honesty is beautifully drawn by a masterly hand. The aged pilgrim, worn out with fatigue, can say without fear, 'I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord sustained me.' He blushed when his name was mentioned, and proved to be a most valuable acquisition to the Pilgrim party. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By honesty, in the abstract, he means to distinguish between his earnest desire to be honest, and a perfect character. Every Christian is the subject of honesty or justice, uprightness and sincerity; yet when we come to describe these virtues in the abstract, or what they really are in their strict purity and utmost perfection, where is the Christian but must wear the conscientious blush, as Honesty did, under a sense of his imperfections. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the confession of an honest heart. It is never afraid of ascribing too much to the sovereignty of grace; nor of giving all the glory to the Sun of Righteousness, for shining upon, and melting down its hard frozen soul. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If the kiss of charity be given, great care should be taken that it is a 'holy' kiss. 'Some have urged the holy kiss, but then I have asked why they made baulks; why they did salute the most handsome, and let the ill-favoured go. This has been unseemly in my sight.'. <cite>—(Grace Abounding, No. 315)</cite> However such a custom may have been innocent in the oriental scenes of apostolic labours, it has been very properly discontinued in later ages, unless it be as in the case of old Honest, or the unexpected meeting of very old friends and relatives. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character and narrative of Fearing is drawn and arranged with great judgment, and in a very affecting manner. Little-faith, mentioned in the First Part, was faint-hearted and distrustful; and thus he contracted guilt, and lost his comfort; but Fearing dreaded sin and coming short of Heaven, more than all that flesh could do unto him. He was alarmed more at the fear of being overcome by temptation, than from a reluctance to undergo derision or persecution. The peculiarity of this description of Christians must be traced back to constitution, habit, first impressions, disproportionate and partial views of truth, and improper instructions; these, concurring with weakness of faith, and the common infirmities of human nature, give a cast to their experience and character, which renders them uncomfortable to themselves, and troublesome to others. Yet no competent judges doubt that they have the root of the matter in them; and none are more entitled to the patient, sympathizing, and tender attention of ministers and Christians. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We cannot but admire the variety of experiences introduced into the Pilgrim's Progress. Many have died remarkably happy in the Lord, who, till very near their last moments have been in bondage through the fear of death. We may be sure of this, that wherever the Lord has begun a work, He will carry it on to the great decisive day. The proof of this is 'he would not go back!' 'If ye continue in My Word, then are ye My disciples indeed.'. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See all through this character, what a conflict there was between fear, and the influence of grace. Though it may not be the most comfortable, yet the end of Mr. Fearing was very joyful. O what a godly jealousy displayed itself all through his life! Better this, than strong, vain-glorious confidence. The Valley of Humiliation suits well with fearing hearts. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When persons are naturally fearful and low-spirited, it will be found, notwithstanding the courage and comfort they sometimes are favoured with, that the constitutional bias of their tempers and dispositions will discover itself, more or less, all through their pilgrimage. Thus there is a kind of sympathy between Fearing and the Valley of Humiliation, which seems congenial to him. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O what a time of need is the day of death, when I am to pack up all, to be gone from hence; now a man grows near the borders of eternity; he sees into the skirts of the next world. Now death is death, and the grave the grave indeed. Has he laid up grace for this day, while cold death strokes his hand over his face, and over his heart, and is turning his blood into jelly; while strong death is loosing his silver cord, and breaking his golden bowl? <cite>—(Bunyan's Saints' Privilege, vol. 1, p. 678)</cite> Can a great-hearted saint wonder that Mr. Fearing was at his wit's end? <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is a glorious display of a fearing heart. Full of courage against evil, and fired with zeal for God's glory. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O how gracious is our Lord! as thy day is, O Pilgrim, so shall thy strength be. Even the river of death, though there can be no bridge to go over, yet faith makes one; and the Lord of faith makes the waters low, to suit the state of His beloved ones. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We know the least appearance of a sin better by its native hue, than we know a grace of the Spirit. Sin is sooner felt in its bitterness upon a sanctified soul than is the grace of God. Sin is dreadful and murderous in the sight of a sanctified soul. Grace lies deep in the hidden part, but sin floats above in the flesh, and is easier seen. Grace as to quantity, seems less than sin. What is leaven, or a grain of mustard seed, to the bulky lump of a body of death? It is a rare thing for some Christians to see their graces, but a thing very common for such to see their sins, to the shaking of their souls. <cite>—(Bunyan's Desire of the Righteous, vol. 1, p. 755)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is an every-day character in the church, delicately and accurately drawn, a man, as Mr. Ivimey says, that 'carried the Slough of Despond in his mind everywhere with him,' not from the difficulties of the way, nor the frowns of the world, but from doubts lest sin, death, and hell, should prevail over them. They walk safely, however sorrowfully; and seldom give the enemy an occasion to rejoice. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is a very striking lesson for professors. Talk not of your great knowledge, rich experience, comfortable frames, and joyful feelings; all are vain and delusive, if the Gospel has not a holy influence upon your practice. On the other hand, be not dejected if you are not favoured with these; for if a holy fear of God, and a godly jealousy over yourselves, possess your heart, verily you are a partaker of the grace of Christ. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hatred to sin can only arise from the love of God. In vain do men think of deterring others from sin, or driving them to duty by low terrors, or low requirements. The strong man armed will keep his palace, till a stronger than he cometh and taketh from him the armour wherein he trusted. But herein they err, not knowing the Scriptures, which set forth love as the constraining motive to true obedience. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Christians who resemble Fearing, are greatly retarded in their progress by discouraging apprehensions; they are apt to spend too much time in unavailing complaints; yet they cannot think of giving up their feeble hopes, or of returning to their forsaken worldly pursuits and pleasures. They are indeed helped forward, through the mercy of God, in a very extraordinary manner; yet they still remain exposed to alarms and discouragements, in every stage of their pilgrimage. They are afraid even of relying on Christ for salvation, because they have not distinct views of His love, and the methods of His grace; and imagine some other qualification to be necessary besides the willingness to seek, knock, and ask for the promised blessings, with a real desire of obtaining them. They imagine, that there has been something in their past life, or that there is some peculiarity in their present habits, and way of applying to Christ, which may exclude them from the benefit: so that they pray with diffidence; and, being consciously unworthy, can hardly believe that the Lord will grant their requests. They are also prone to overlook the most decisive evidences of their reconciliation to God; and to persevere in arguing with perverse ingenuity against their own manifest happiness. The same mixture of humility and unbelief renders persons of this description backward in associating with their brethren, and in frequenting those companies in which they might obtain further instruction; for they are afraid of being considered as believers, or even serious inquirers; so that affectionate and earnest persuasion is requisite to prevail with them to join in those religious exercises, by which Christians especially receive the teaching of the Holy Spirit. Yet this arises not from disinclination, but diffidence; and though they are often peculiarly favoured with seasons of great comfort, to counterbalance their dejections, yet they never hear or read of those who 'have drawn back to perdition,' but they are terrified with the idea that they shall shortly resemble them; so that every warning given against hypocrisy or self-deception seems to point them out by name, and every new discovery of any fault or mistake in their views, temper, or conduct, seems to decide their doom. At the same time, they are often remarkably melted into humble, admiring gratitude, by contemplating the love and sufferings of Christ, and seem to delight in hearing of that subject above all others. They do not peculiarly fear difficulties, self-denial, reproaches, or persecution, which deter numbers from making an open profession of religion; and yet they are more backward in this respect than others, because they deem themselves unworthy to be admitted to such privileges and into such society, or else are apprehensive of being finally separated from them or becoming a disgrace to religion. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a solid, scriptural definition; pray mind it. Here conditions may safely be admitted; and happy is the Christian who keeps closest to these conditions, in order to enjoy peace of conscience, and joy of heart in Christ. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That heart, which is under the teaching and influence of the grace of God, will detect such horrid notions, and cry out against them. God forbid that ever I should listen one moment to such diabolical sentiments! for they are hatched in hell, and propagated on earth, by the father of lies. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is a horrible and blasphemous perversion of Scripture, to take encouragement in sin, from those sad examples of it in the saints, which are held up, in terrorem, as so many beacons by which we may avoid the same. To talk, and especially to act like Self-will affords the fullest proof that a man never came in at the gate. The Lord change every such perverse will, and preserve the church from principles and practices so diabolical. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> What shall we say to these things? Lord, keep me! <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may be seriously inquired as to whether in all Satan's temptations, any one is so fatal to immortal souls as the idea of a death-bed repentance. Have not prayers against sudden death a tendency to interfere with or obstruct that daily walk with God, which alone can fit us to meet the king of terrors? When heart and strength fail; when the body is writhing in agony, or lying an insensible lump of mortality; is that the time to make peace with God? Such persons must he infatuated with strange notions of the Divine Being. No, my reader, life is the time to serve the Lord, the time to insure the great reward. Sudden death is a release from much pain and anxiety. It is the most merciful gate by which we can enter upon immortality. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pray attentively mind, and deeply consider the six following observations; they are just; they are daily confirmed to us in the different conduct of professors. Study, and pray to improve them to your soul's profit. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adam hid himself because he was naked. But how could he be naked, when before he had made himself an apron? O! the approach of God consumed and burnt off his apron! His apron would not keep him from the eye of the incorruptible God. When God deals with such men for sin, assuredly they will find themselves naked. <cite>—(Bunyan on Genesis, vol. 2, p. 432)</cite> If the wicked flee when no man pursueth, how can they stand when God lets loose death and eternity upon their guilty souls? <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thou art bound to Heaven, but the way thither is dangerous. It is beset everywhere with evil angels, who would rob thee of thy soul. If thou wouldest go on cheerfully in thy dangerous journey, commit thy treasure—thy soul, to God, to keep; and then thou mayest say with comfort, Well, that care is over; my soul is safe; the thieves, if they meet me, cannot come at that; God will keep it to my joy and comfort at the great day. <cite>—(Bunyan's Advice to Sufferers, vol. 2, p. 701)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The spiritual refreshment, arising from experimental conversation, seems to be especially intended; but the name of Gaius suggests also the importance of the Apostle's exhortation, 'Use hospitality without grudging.' This ought to be obeyed even to strangers, if they are certified to us as brethren in Christ. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> Every Christian's house should, so far as ability is given, be an inn for the refreshment of weary fellow-pilgrims. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This character is drawn from that of the well-beloved Gaius, in the third epistle of John. Although, in comparison with the great bulk of Christians, there are but few such in the church; yet in all ages, and in most churches, some hospitable Gaius is to be found. May their numbers be greatly increased. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ignatius, a bishop or pastor of a church in Antioch, cruelly martyred for the truth in the second century; not Ignatius Loyola, the Jesuit. Mr. Bunyan obtained all this information from Foxe's Book of Martyrs, which was written before Satan had introduced the Jesuits into the world. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Marriage is honourable in all' (Heb. 13:4). Notwithstanding all the cares of a family, while the married have many troubles, the single have few, if any, real enjoyments of life. The will of our heavenly Father is here enforced upon the pilgrims by Gaius—only let pilgrims be united together, marry in the Lord, and we may expect his blessing to fit us to do His will. Vows of celibacy are from beneath, from the father of lies—contrary to the order of nature, and the expressed will of God. 'It is not good to be alone.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The different parts of social worship and Christian fellowship are here allegorically described. The heave-shoulder and wave-breast typify the power and love of our great High Priest; that we should devote to Him our whole heart, with fervent prayer, and grateful praise. The wine represents the exhilarating effects of the shedding of Christ's blood, and its application to us by living faith. The milk is the simple instruction of the Scriptures. The butter and honey are animating views of God and heavenly joy. The apples are the promises and privileges of Christians (see Song. 2:3; Prov. 25:11). And the nuts those difficult doctrines, which amply repay us the trouble of penetrating their meaning. Christians so employed have far sweeter enjoyments than they ever had in the mirth, diversions, and pleasures of the world. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bunyan takes advantage of the common past-time of solving riddles, to teach important truth in a way calculated to be impressed on the memory. Thus, in the treatise on the Covenants of the Law and Grace, the second Adam was before the first, and also the second covenant before the first. This is a riddle. <cite>—(Vol. 2, p. 524)—(ED)</cite> Observe here, the feast of pilgrims was attended with mirth. Christians have the greatest reason to be merry; but then it ought to be spiritual mirth, which springs from spiritual views and spiritual conversation. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When Christian intercourse is conducted with gravity and cheerfulness united, it is both pleasant and instructive. Speech should be 'always with grace, seasoned with salt, that it may minister grace to the bearers,' and thus 'provoke one another unto love, and to good works'; thus are the young encouraged to follow that which is good. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here is a genuine discovery of a gracious heart; when it is delighted with spiritual company and conversation, and longs for its continuance. Is it so with you? <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If our love to sinners be only shown by seeking their spiritual good, it will be considered as a bigoted desire to proselyte them to our sect; but uniform diligent endeavours to relieve their temporal wants are intelligible to every man, and bring a good report on the profession of the Gospel (Matt. 5:16). <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O, this dying to self, to self-righteous pride, vain confidence, self-love, and self-complacency, is hard work to the old man; yea, it is both impracticable and impossible to him. It is only grace that can conquer and subdue him; and where grace reigns, this work is carried on day by day. And yet the old man of sin, and self-righteousness, still lives in us. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Old age affords advantage in overcoming some propensities, yet habits of indulgence often counterbalance the decays of nature; and avarice, suspicion, and peevishness, with other evils, gather strength as men advance in years. Some old men may imagine that they have renounced sin, because they are no longer capable of committing the crimes in which they once lived. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The refreshment of Divine consolations, and Christian fellowship, are intended to prepare us for vigorously maintaining the good fight of faith; not only against the enemies of our own souls, but also against the opposers of our most holy religion. We are soldiers, and should unite together under the Captain of Salvation, to contend for the faith once delivered to the saints, by every method authorized by the Word of God; nor must we shrink from danger and contumely in so good a cause. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may he asked, how for it is right to expose ourselves to danger and difficulties, since it is rashness, not courage, to expose ourselves to unnecessary danger, or to give unnecessary offence. I would answer, It can never be improper to expose error, or oppose a prevailing vice, by which God's children are in danger of being beguiled. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Giant Slay-good represents a wicked, cruel man—a mere cannibal, invested with judicial authority—a selfish, malignant persecutor, who intimidated feeble-minded professors by fines and imprisonments, to the hazard of their souls. By the thieves, of whom he was master, were perhaps intended the common informers, who got their living by giving evidence against Nonconformists; some cruel magistrates pursued them to death. The attack was by scriptural and rational arguments, which led to a great alteration in these accursed laws. <cite>—(Ivimey and Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All pilgrims are not alike vigorous, strong, and lively; some are weak, creep and crawl on, in the ways of the Lord. No matter, if there be but a pilgrim's heart, all shall be well at last; for Omnipotence itself is for us, and then we may boldly ask, 'Who shall be against us?'. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Constitutional timidity and lowness of spirits, arising from a feeble frame, give a peculiar cast to the views and nature of religious profession, which unfits for hard and perilous service. The difference between Feeble-mind and Fearing seems to be this—the former was more afraid of opposition, and the latter more doubtful about the event, which perhaps may intimate, that Slay-good rather represents persecutors than deceivers. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What a sweet simple relation is here! Doth it not suit many a feeble mind? Poor soul, weak as he was, yet his Lord provided against his danger. He sent some strong ones to his deliverance, and to slay his enemy. Mind his belief, even in his utmost extremity. Learn somewhat from this Feeble-mind. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O how sweet to reflect, that the most gigantic enemies shall be conquered, and their most malicious designs be overruled for our good; yea, what they intend for our ruin shall be made to work for our health and prosperity. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for My sake shall find it' (Matt. 16:25). <cite>—(ED)</cite> Here is a contrast between a feeble believer and a specious hypocrite; the latter eludes persecutions by time-serving, yet perishes in his sins; the former suffers and trembles, yet hopes to be delivered and comforted. The frequency with which this is introduced, and the variety of characters by which it is illustrated, show us how important the author deemed such warnings. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Events, which at first appear big with misery and misfortune, have been found afterwards to have been as so many dark passages, to lead into brighter and more glorious displays of the Divine power, wisdom, and goodness. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'Marriage is honourable in all'; nor will Christian females find such a state any hindrance to their abounding in works of charity and mercy. By fulfilling the duties of the married life, they will cause the ways of God to be well spoken of. The desire of Paul was, 'That the younger women marry, be sober, love their husbands, love their children, be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed' (Titus 2:4, 5). <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What an open, ingenuous confession is here! though feeble in mind, he was strong in wisdom and sound judgment. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Woe be to those who offend one of these little ones; no less dear to God than the most eminent and distinguished saints. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O that this were more practised among Christians of different standings, degrees, and judgments! If they who are strong were thus to bear with the weak, as they ought, how much more love, peace, and unanimity would prevail! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Excellent! See the nature of Christian love; even to be ready to spare to a brother, what we ourselves have occasion for. Love looketh not at the things of our own, but to provide for the wants of others. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character of Feeble-mind seems to coincide, in some things, with that of Fearing, and in others with the description of Little-faith. Constitutional timidity and lowness of spirits, arising from a feeble frame, and frequent sickness, while they are frequently the means of exciting men to religion, give also a peculiar cast to their views and the nature of their profession—tend to hold them under perpetual discouragements, and unfit them for hard and perilous services. This seems implied in the name given to the native place of Feeble-mind; yet this is often connected with evident sincerity, and remarkable perseverance in the ways of God. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here, very ingeniously, an associate is found for poor Feeble-mind; in one equally weak, lame, and limping in his religious sentiments, who, instead of forming his own sentiments from the Word of Truth, leant upon the sentiments and opinions of others. The hesitation of Feeble-mind to accept one of his crutches, is humourously conceived. He would, weak as he was, think for himself; though he had no objection to quote the opinion of another Christian against an adversary. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> 'As iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.' How great a comfort to find a fellow-pilgrim whose experience agrees with our own, and with whom we can take sweet counsel! Still all our dependence must be on Ready-to-halt's crutches—'the promises.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The near prospect of persecution is formidable even to true believers, notwithstanding all the encouragements of God's Word. It is useful to realize such scenes, that we may pray, without ceasing, for wisdom, fortitude, patience, meekness, faith, and love sufficient for us, should matters come to the worst. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How happy to find a family, in Vanity Fair, whose master will receive and entertain pilgrims. Blessed be God for the present revival of religion in our day, and for the many houses that are open to friends of the Lamb. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The inquiry of disciples, after suitable company, discovers that they, with David, love the Lord's saints; and in the excellent of the earth is all their delight (Psa. 16:3). A genuine discovery this of a gracious heart. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Great, indeed, was the change in the town of Vanity, when Christiana and her party of pilgrims arrived, compared with the but recent period when Faithful was martyred. The declaration of liberty of conscience had rendered the profession of vital godliness more public, still there was persecution enough to make it comparatively pure. Dr. Cheever has indulged in a delightful reverie, in his lecture on Vanity Fair, by supposing, at some length, how our glorious dreamer would now describe the face of society in our present Vanity Fair. After describing the consequences that had arisen from religion having become FASHIONABLE, he hints at the retrograde movement towards Popery, known under the name of Puseyism. 'It happened, in process of time, that a part of the pilgrims who remained in Vanity Fair, began to visit the cave of Giant Pope, and it became a sort of fashionable pilgrimage to that cave. They brushed up the giant, and gave him medicines to alleviate the hurts from those bruises which he had received in his youth; and, to make the place pleasanter, they carefully cleared away the remains of the bones and skulls of burned pilgrims, and planted a large enclosure with flowers and evergreens.' 'The cage in which the Pilgrims were once confined was now never used; some said it was consecrated for church purposes, and put under the cathedral, in a deep cell, from which it might again be brought forth if occasion required it.' The Doctor's description of the present state of Vanity Fair is very deeply interesting and amusing. <cite>—(ED)</cite> When religion is counted honourable, we shall not want professors; but trying times are sifting times. As the chaff flies before the wind, so will the formal professors before a storm of persecution. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite>  <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kindness to the poor increases and builds up the church. It conquers the prejudices of the worldly, secures their confidence, and brings them under the preaching of the Gospel. They rationally conclude that they cannot be bad people who do so much good. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This monster is Antichrist. The devil is the head; the synagogue of Satan is the body; the wicked spirit of iniquity is the soul. The devil made use of the church [the clergy] to midwife this monster into the world. He had plums in his dragon's mouth, and so came in by flatteries. He metamorphosed himself into a beast, a man, or woman; and the inhabitants of the world loved the woman dearly, became her sons, and took up helmet and shield to defend her. She arrayed herself in flesh-taking ornaments—gold, and precious stones, like an harlot. She made the kings drunken, and they gave her the blood of saints and martyrs until she was drunken, and did revel and roar. But when her cup is drunk out, God will call her to such a reckoning, that all her clothes, pearls, and jewels shall not be able to pay the shot. This beast is compared to the wild boar that comes out of the wood to devour the church of God (Psa. 80:13). The temporal sword will kill its body, but spirit can only be slain by spirit; the Lord the Spirit will slay its soul. <cite>—(Bunyan on Antichrist, vol. 2, p. 47)</cite> Is not Antichrist composed of all the State religions in the world? <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this woman's name and costume see Revelation 17:1-4. She has just sent one of her illegitimate sons to England, under the impudent assumption of Archbishop of Westminster. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And that you may be convinced of the truth of this, look back and compare Antichrist four hundred years ago, with Antichrist as he now is, and you shall see what work the Lord Jesus has begun to make with him; kingdoms and countries He hath taken from her. True, the fogs of Antichrist, and the smoke that came with him out of the bottomless pit, has eclipsed the glorious light of the Gospel; but you know, in eclipses, when they are recovering, all the creatures upon the face of the earth cannot put a stop to that course, until the sun or the moon have recovered their glory. And thus it shall be now, the Lord is returning to visit this people with His primitive lustre; he will not go back until the light of the sun shall be sevenfold. <cite>—(Bunyan's Antichrist and his ruin, vol. 2, p. 48)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When nations have restored to the people the property of which they have been plundered, under the pretence of assisting to obtain the pardon of sin and the favour of God, the monster will soon die; when neither rule, nor honour, nor pelf is to be gained by hypocrisy. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may refer to that noble band of eminent men who, in 1675, preached the morning exercises against Popery; among others were Owen, Manton, Baxter, Doolittle, Jenkyn, Poole, and many others. They were then, and ever will be, of great fame. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The plans of Charles II and James II, to re-establish Popery in England, were defeated by the union of the eminent Nonconformists with some decided enemies to Rome in the Established Church; this brought them into esteem and respect. Mr. Scott's note on this passage is—'The disinterested, and bold decided conduct of many dissenters, on this occasion, procured considerable favour both to them and their brethren, with the best friends of the nation; but the prejudices of others prevented them from reaping all the advantage from it that they ought to have done.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>David Hume, in his History of England, admitted the invaluable services of the Puritans, 'By whom the precious spark of liberty was kindled and preserved, and to whom the English owe all the blessings of their excellent constitution.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a most encouraging view of the tender care of the Saviour, to the children of believers committed to His care, by godly parents. Not by any ceremonial observance, but by constant fervent supplications to the Throne of Grace on their behalf, and by a consistent pious example to train them up in the way in which they should go, that when they are old they should not depart from the new and living way. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here we frequently find our author speaking of our God and Saviour as Man; he excels in this. It is to be wished that authors and preachers wrote and spake of the manhood of Jesus, who was a perfect Man, like unto us in all things except sin. The view and consideration of this is sweet to faith, and endears our Saviour to our hearts. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What cannot Great-heart do? what feats not perform? what victories not gain? Who can stand before Great-heart? Diffidence shall fall, and Giant Despair be slain by the power of Great-heart, with 'the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God' (Eph. 6:17); even Despondency, though almost starved, shall be delivered, and his daughter Much-afraid shall be rescued. O for more of Great-heart's company! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> The struggle with Despair may be dangerous, and painful, and long-continued, but it shall he finally successful. 'I am persuaded,' saith the Apostle, 'that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.' Paul demolished the castle, and slew the giant; but,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Sin can rebuild the castle, make't remain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And make Despair the Giant live again.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—ED. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How well does Mr. Bunyan describe the experience of the Much-afraids, Ready-to-halts, and the Feeble-minds, in the Come and Welcome. 'Poor coming soul, thou art like the man that would ride full gallop, whose horse will hardly trot! Now, the desire of his mind is not to be judged of by the slow pace of the dull jade he rides on, but by the hitching, and kicking, and spurring, as he sits on his back. Thy flesh is like this dull jade; it will not gallop after Christ, it will be backward, though thy soul and Heaven lie at stake. But be of good comfort, Christ judgeth according to the sincerity of the heart.'. <cite>—(Vol. 1, p. 252)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the work and aim of every faithful minister of Christ, to destroy Giant Despair, and demolish Doubting Castle, in the hearts of God's children. A more awful character is not in the world, than the man who assumes the ministerial name and character, without understanding the nature of that ministry of reconciliation which is committed to everyone who is really called and sent of God. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>'The wain,' seven bright stars in the constellation of Ursa Major, called by country people, the plough, or the wain, or Charles I's chariot. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Those ministers who exercise the greatest affection towards weak and upright Christians, are most according to the description of pastors, after God's own heart, given in the Scriptures of truth. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bunyan was peculiarly tender with the weak; they are to be received, but not to doubtful disputations. Thus, with regard to the great cause of separation among Christians, he says, 'If water-baptism' (whether by sprinkling of infants, or immersing of adults) 'trouble their peace, wound the consciences of the godly, and dismember their fellowships, it is although an ordinance, for the present to be prudently shunned, for the edification of the church.' 'Love is more discovered when we receive, for the sake of Christ, than when we refuse his children for want of water.'. <cite>—(Bunyan on Baptism, vol. 2, p. 608)</cite> When will such peaceful sentiments spread over the church? <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are things taught by the Gospel, here called 'rarities,' which, though high and mysterious, will yet, when clearly stated, prove the means of exciting Christians to live by faith, and to cultivate whatsoever things are lovely and of good report. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strong faith, in the words of Christ, will 'believe down' mountains of afflictions, or tumble them out of the Christian's way. Though it will not perform miracles, it will remove difficulties resembling mountains. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The history of Joseph, with that of Mr. Bunyan, and of thousands besides, proves, that charges against a godly, innocent man, arising from the prejudice, ill-will, and malice of his enemies, shall eventually turn out to his honour, and to their confusion. 'Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against yon FALSELY, for My sake' (Matt. 5:11). <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This represents the folly of those who go about to reform the manners, without aiming at the conversion of the heart. Nature, in its highest state of cultivation and improvement, is nature still. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O, damned souls will have thoughts that will clash with glory, clash with justice, clash with law, clash with itself, clash with hell, and with the everlastingness of misery; but the point, the edge, and the poison of all these thoughts will still be galling, and dropping their stings into the sore, grieved, wounded, fretted place, which is the conscience, though not the conscience only; for I may say of the souls in hell, that they, all over, are but one wound, one sore. <cite>—(Bunyan's Greatness of the Soul, vol. 1, p. 119)</cite> Well might Mercy say, 'Blessed are they that are delivered from this place!'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O what a blessed thing it is to long for the Word of God so as not to be satisfied without it, and to prize it above and beyond all other things! Love to the Word excites the soul to say with David, 'I have longed for Thy salvation, O Lord' (Psa. 119:174). This is a special mark of a gracious soul. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Every true believer longs to be more completely acquainted with the Scriptures from day to day, and to look into them continually. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> Abraham Cheer, who perished in prison for nonconformity in Bunyan's time, published a little volume of Poems, in which he compares the Bible to a looking-glass, in these very appropriate lines—'If morn by morn you in this glass will dress you, I have some hopes that God by it may bless you.'. <cite>—(P. 37)—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This doubtless is meant to intimate, that in times of great anxiety, and in prospect of seasons of difficulty, Christians desire above all things the special supports and consolations of the Word of God. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>By this jewelry is probably intimated, that they gave them written testimonials of possessing the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, that they might he recognized as Christian women by other churches. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the names given to these opposers, they appear to represent certain wild enthusiasts who intrude themselves in the way of professors, to perplex their minds, and persuade them that, unless they adopt their reveries or superstitions, they cannot be saved. An ungovernable imagination, a mind incapable of sober reflection, and a dogmatizing spirit, characterize these enemies of the truth; they assault religious persons with specious reasonings, caviling objections, confident assertions, bitter reproaches, proud boastings, sarcastic censures, and rash judgments. They endeavour to draw them to their party, or drive them from attending to religion at all. But the Word of God, used with fervent, persevering prayer, will silence such dangerous assailants, and confirm others also. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Truth will make a man valiant; and valour for truth will make a pilgrim fight with wild-headed, inconsiderate, and pragmatic opposers. The blood he loses in such a battle is his honour, the scars he gets are his glory. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> He does not attempt to hide himself, or run from his and his Lord's enemies. O that pilgrims, especially those that are young were better trained to this battle! In Bunyan's time, there were comparatively few of these cavilers; now their name is Legion. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In this battle, this striving for the truth, three considerations strike the mind. <cite>—(1)</cite> Reliance upon Divine aid, without which we can do nothing. (2). A right Jerusalem weapon, forged in the fire of love, well tempered with Bible truths. Such a sword will make even the angel of the bottomless pit flee, its edge will never blunt, and it will cut through everything opposed to it. (3). Decision of character, perseverance to the utmost; no trimming or meanly compounding for truth, but a determination, in the Lord's strength, to come off more than conquerors. It is blessed fighting when hand and heart are engaged, and the sword grows united to both. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The church of Christ has produced heroes of the first class in point of courage, which they have displayed in circumstances of great danger. Luther and Knox, and Latimer and Bunyan, were men of this stamp, each of whom might, with great propriety, have been named Valiant-for-the-truth. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reason why so many professors set out, and go on for a season, but fall away at last, is, because they do not enter into the pilgrim's path by Christ, who is the gate. They do not see themselves quite lost, ruined, hopeless, and wretched; their hearts are not broken for sin; therefore they do not begin by receiving Christ as the only Saviour of such miserable sinners. But they set out in nature's strength; and not receiving nor living upon Christ, they fall away. This is the reason of this inquiry, Did you come in at the gate? A question we ought to put to ourselves, and be satisfied about. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among many puzzling questions which agitate the Christian's mind, this is very generally a subject of inquiry. At the mount of transfiguration, the Apostles knew the glorified spirits of Moses and Elias. The rich man and Lazarus and Abraham knew each other. The most solemn inquiry is, to reconcile with the bliss of Heaven the discovery that some dear relative has been shut out. Shall we forget them? or will all our exquisite happiness centre in the glory of God? Bunyan has no doubt upon personal identity in Heaven—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Our friends that lived godly here</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall there be found again;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The wife, the child, and father dear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With others of our train.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Those God did use us to convert</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We there with joy shall meet.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And jointly shall, with all our heart,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In life each other greet.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<cite>—(One Thing Needful, ver. 69, 71)</cite>
					<p>—(ED). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A sound Christian is not afraid to be examined, and sifted to the bottom, for he can give reason of the hope that is in him. He knows why and wherefore he commenced his pilgrimage. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a reproach cast upon religion in every age. Pharaoh said to Moses and the Israelites, 'Ye are idle, ye are idle.' Men by nature imagine, that time spent in reading the Bible and in prayer is wasted. It behooves all believers to avoid every appearance of evil; and, by exemplary diligence, frugality, and good management, to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Worldly people, in opposing the Gospel, descant upon the hypocrisy of religious persons; they pick up every vague report that they hear to their disadvantage, and narrowly watch for the halting of such as they are acquainted with; and then they form general conclusions from a few distorted and uncertain stories. Thus they endeavour to prove that there is no reality in religion. This is a frivolous sophistry, often employed after all other arguments have been silenced. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If Judas the traitor, or Francis Spira the backslider, were alive, to whisper these men in the ear a little, and to tell them what it hath cost their souls for turning back, it would surely stick by them as long as they have a day to live in the world. Agrippa gave a fair step on a sudden; he stepped almost into the bosom of Christ in less than half an hour. 'Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.' It was but almost, and so he had as good been not at all. He stepped fair, but stepped short. He was hot whilst he ran, but he was quickly out of breath. O this but ALMOST! I tell you, it lost his soul. What a doom they will have, who were almost at Heaven's gate, but ran back again! <cite>—(Bunyan's Heavenly Footman)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How natural is it for carnal men to give an evil report of the ways of the Lord; and to discourage those who are just setting out, by telling of the dangers and difficulties they shall meet with! But here is not one word of the pleasures, comforts, and joys, that are experienced in the ways of the Lord. No, they feel them not, they believe not one word about them; therefore they cannot speak of them. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here we see that valiant soldiers of Christ ascribe all to faith. They set out with faith, and they hold on and hold out by believing. Thus they give all the glory to Christ, who is the object, author, and finisher of faith. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Various are the enemies we meet with in our Christian warfare. The world, with its enchantments, has a tendency to stupefy, and bring on a fatal lethargy. How many professors receive principles, by which they harden themselves in carnal pursuits and sensual gratifications; and others, still preserving a religious name and character, are as dead in their souls, as devoted to the world as these, though contending for legal principles, and high in their religious pretensions! <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It behooves all who love their souls to shun that hurry of business, and multiplicity of affairs and projects, into which many are betrayed by degrees, in order to supply increasing expenses, that might be avoided by strict frugality; for they load the soul with thick clay, are a heavy weight to the most upright, render a man's way doubtful and joyless, and drown many in perdition. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Old pilgrims, ye who have set out well, and gone on well for a long season, consider ye are yet in the world, which is enchanted ground. Know your danger of seeking rest here, or of sleeping in any of its enchanting arbours. Though the flesh may be weary, the spirit faint, and the arbours inviting, yet beware. Press on. Look to the Strong for strength; and to the Beloved for rest in His way. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>Mark how the ready hands of death prepare;<br/>
His bow is bent, and he hath notch'd his dart;<br/>
He aims, he levels at thy slumb'ring heart.<br/>
The wound is posting; O be wise, beware!<br/>
What, has the voice of danger lost the art<br/>
To raise the spirit of neglected care?<br/>
Well, sleep thy fill, and take thy soft reposes;<br/>
But know, withal, sweet tastes have sour closes;<br/>
And he repents in thorns that sleeps in beds of roses.</p>
						<cite>—(Quarles' Emblems, 1—7).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This inculcates the duty of constant attention to the precepts and counsels of Scripture, as well as reliance on its promises; and a habitual application to the Lord by prayer, to teach us the true meaning of His Word, that we may learn the way of peace and safety in the most difficult and doubtful cases. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Word of God is compared to a map and a lantern; to these we shall do well to take heed, as to light shining in a dark place. Let this be the pilgrim's guide, when the light of spiritual joy or sensible comfort is withdrawn. <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>To follow Christ.</span>
							<br/>
							<span><b>He</b> is to them instead of eyes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><b>He</b> must before them go in any wise;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And He must lead them by the water side,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This is the work of Him our faithful guide.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Since snares, and traps, and gins are for us set,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Since here's a hole, and there is spread a net,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O let nobody at my muse deride,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No man can travel here without a guide.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Bunyan's House of God, vol. 2, p. 582.)</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ignorance and pride may long maintain a form of godliness, though it be a weariness to them; but after a time they will be gradually drawn back into the world, retaining nothing of their religion except certain distorted doctrinal notions. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is the duty, and will be the practice of pilgrims, to strive to be instrumental to the good of others. But, at the same time, it behooves them to take heed to themselves, and watch, lest they catch harm from them and their conduct. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>What a sound sleep of infatuation hath this enchanting world cast many a professor into! They are proof against all warnings, and dead as to any means of arousing them. When this sleep of death seizes the soul, it destroys faith, infatuates reason, and causes men to talk incoherently. They have lost the language of pilgrims. Their state is awful; beware of it; pray against it. For 'if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him' (1 John 2:15). <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This view of the Enchanted Ground seems to vary from that which has been considered in the First Part. The circumstances of believers who are deeply engaged in business, and constrained to spend much of their time among worldly people, may here be particularly intended. This may sometimes be unavoidable; but it is enchanted ground. Many professors, fascinated by the advantages and connections thus presented to them, fall asleep, and wake no more; and others are entangled by those thorns and briers which 'choke the Word, and render it unfruitful.' The more soothing the scene the greater the danger, and the more urgent need is there for watchfulness and circumspection. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a solemn period in the Christian's pilgrimage. In the Heavenly Footman, Bunyan has given some admirable general directions—'Because I would have you think of them, take all in short in this little bit of paper—1. Get into the way. 2. Then study on it. 3. Then strip and lay aside everything that would hinder. 4. Beware of by-paths. 5. Do not gaze and stare much about thee; but be sure to ponder the path of thy feet. 6. Do not stop for any that call after thee, whether it be the world, the flesh, or the devil; for all these will hinder thy journey if possible. 7. Be not daunted with any discouragements thou meetest with as thou goest. 8. Take heed of stumbling at the Cross. And, 9. Cry hard to God for an enlightened heart and a willing mind, and God give thee a prosperous journey. Yet, before I do quite take my leave of thee, a few motives. It may be they will be as good as a pair of spurs, to prick on thy lumpish heart in this rich voyage. If thou winnest, then Heaven, God, Christ, glory eternal is thine. If thou lose, thou procurest eternal death.'. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Word of God is the only light to direct our steps. He who neglects this is a fool. He who sets up and looks for any other light to direct him is mad, and knows not what he does. As folly and madness beset him, danger and distress will come upon him. Trembling souls will attend closely to God's Word. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He who fears always, will pray evermore. The fear of the heart will bring pilgrims on their knees. He who fears to be or go wrong, will pray to be set right. The Lord will direct the heart, and order the goings of all who cry to Him. Fear and prayer go hand in hand. Joy shall attend them. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No more money than an owl loves light. 'The antiquarian, who delights to solace himself in the benighted days of monkish owl-light, sometimes passes for a divine.'. <cite>—(Warburton)—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>My soul, what's lighter than a feather? Wind.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than wind? The fire. And what than fire? The mind.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What's lighter than the mind? A thought. Than thought?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This bubble world. What than this bubble? Naught.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<cite>—(Quarles).</cite>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Prayer's arrow drawn</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Down to the head by nervous penitence,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or meek humility's compliant strings,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wings to the destin'd mark its certain way,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And ne'er was shot in vain!</span>
						</p>
						<cite>—(Dodd's Epiphany, p. 32, 4to).</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O pilgrims, beware of this Madam Bubble! Know and consider well, that ye have a nature exactly suited to accept of her offers, and to fall in love with her promises. The riches, honours, and pleasures of this world, what mortal can withstand? or who can forego them? No one but he who sees more charms in Jesus, more glory in His Cross, and more comfort in the enjoyment of His love and presence; and therefore, is continually looking and crying to Him, 'Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity.'. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> Many, indeed, are her fair promises and golden dreams. Many hath she brought to the halter, and ten thousand times more to Hell. O for precious faith, to overcome the world; and to pass through it, in pursuit of a nobler portion, as strangers and pilgrims! <cite>—(Burder)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Is she not rightly named Bubble? Art thou convinced that she is nothing more? Why then dost thou not break loose from her hold? I ask, Why has the world such hold of thee? Why dost thou listen to her enchantments? For shame! Stir up thy strength, call forth thy powers! What! be convinced that the world is a bubble, and be led captive by her. Shake her off, you ought, you should, it is your duty. Let Mr. Stand-fast answer these questions. His earnest and solemn prayers plainly prove the sense he had of his own weakness and inability to extricate himself from her enchantments. Though some may appear to despise the dominion of sin, I am convinced that it must be a Divine power to deliver me from it. <cite>—(J.B.)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was amidst this Enchanted Ground that good Mr. Stand-fast, whom the Pilgrims there found upon his knees, was so hard beset and enticed by Madam Bubble; and indeed it is by her sorceries that the ground itself is enchanted. Madam Bubble is the world, with its allurements and vanities; and whosoever, as Mr. Great-heart said, do lay their eyes upon her beauty are counted the enemies of God; for God hath said that the friendship of the world is enmity against God; and he hath said furthermore, 'Love not the world, nor the things of the world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.' So Mr. Stand-fast did well to betake him to his knees, praying to Him that could help him. So if all pilgrims, when worldly proposals and enticements allure them, and they feel the love of the world tempting them, and gaining on them, would thus go to more earnest prayer, and be made more vigilant against temptations, Madam Bubble would not gain so many victories. <cite>—(Cheever)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ensuing description represents the happy state of those that live in places favoured with many lively Christians, united in heart and judgment; and where instances of triumphant deathbed scenes are often witnessed. Aged believers, in such circumstances, have been remarkably delivered from fears and temptations, and animated by the hopes and earnests of Heaven; so that, while death seemed bitter to nature, it became pleasant to the soul to think of the joy and glory that would immediately follow it. <cite>—(Scott)</cite></p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>O scenes surpassing fable, and yet true!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Scenes of accomplished bliss, which who can see,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though but in distant prospect, and not feel</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His soul refresh'd with foretaste of the joy?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bright as a sun the sacred City shines;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All kingdoms and all princes of the earth</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Flock to that light, the glory of all lands</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Flows into her; unbounded is her joy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And endless her increase. Thy rams are there,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nebaioth, and the flocks of Kellar there;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The looms of Ormus, and the mines of Ind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Saba's spicy groves pay tribute there.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Praise is in all her gates; upon her walls,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And in her streets, and in her spacious courts,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is heard Salvation!</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These messengers are the diseases or decays by which the Lord takes down the earthly tabernacle, when He sees good to receive the souls of His people into His immediate presence. In plain language, it was reported that Christiana was sick and near death, and she herself became sensible of her situation. 'The arrow sharpened by love' implies, that the time, manner, and circumstances of the believer's death, are appointed by Him 'who loved us, and gave Himself for us.' He, as it were, says to the dying saint, 'It is I, be not afraid.'. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the faith and patience of this dying Christian heroine, who began her pilgrimage with trembling steps, maintained her journey with holy zeal, and thus finished her course with joy. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O how blessed is the death of the righteous, who die in the Lord! Even a wicked Balaam could wish for this. But it will be granted to none but those who have lived in the Lord; whose souls have been quickened by His Spirit to come unto Jesus, believe in Him, and glory of Him as their righteousness and salvation. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evident decays of natural powers as effectually convince the observing person, as if a messenger had been sent to inform him. But men in general cling to life, willfully overlook such tokens, and try to keep up to the last the vain hope of recovering; those around them, by a cruel compassion, soothe them in the delusion; so that numbers die of chronic diseases as suddenly as if they had been shot through the heart. Perhaps the author had some reference to those inexplicable presages of death which some persons evidently experience. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the joyful end of one ready to halt at every step. Take courage hence, ye lame, halting pilgrims. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tokens are taken from that well-known portion of Scripture, Ecclesiastes 12:1-7; in which the dealings of the Lord are represented as uniformly gentle to the feeble, trembling, humble believer; and the circumstances of their deaths comparatively encouraging and easy. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Holy War, the doubters having been dispersed, three or four thrust themselves into Mansoul. Now, to whose house should these Diabolic doubters go, but to that of Old Evil-questioning. So he made them welcome. Well, said he, be of what shire yon will, you have the very length of my foot, are one with my heart. So they thanked him. I, said one, am an election-doubter; I, said another, am a vocation-doubter; then said the third, I am a salvation-doubter; and the fourth said, I am a grace-doubter. I am persuaded you are down boys, and are one with my heart, said the old gentleman. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pilgrims, mind this. It is as much your duty to strive, in the strength of the Lord, against unreasonable doubts and slavish fears, as against sin; nay, are they not, in their own nature, the worst of sins, as they spring from infidelity, and dishonour God's precious truth, glorious grace, and everlasting salvation? Never, never, then, cherish or give way to them, but resist, and shut the door of your hearts against them. <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>How various is the experience of Christians in the hour of death. Christian and Hopeful inquired 'if the waters were all of a depth.' The answer was, 'You shall find it deeper or shallower, as you believe in the King of the place.' 'What ailed thee, O Jordan, that thou wast driven back?' The answer is, 'At the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God of Jacob.' In proportion as a Christian can say, 'for me to live is Christ,' in that proportion may he hope to find the water shallow, and feel support to his feet in the trying passage. <cite>—(ED)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the truth of Jesus is victory. He who is valiant for it shall share most of its comforts in life, and in death. O Lord, increase our faith in the never-failing Word of truth and grace, for Thy glory and our soul's triumph! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such is the joy and blessedness of faith! How does it bring near and realize the sight of Christ in glory! Do we indeed see Christ by the eye of faith? Is He the one, the chief object of our soul? Verily, then we shall count our days on earth toilsome ones, and long for the full fruition of Him in glory. O it will be our great glory to see that dear Man, whose blessed head was crowned with thorns, and whose lovely face was spit upon, for us. O that we may be living every day upon Him and to Him, till we see Him as He is! <cite>—(Mason)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This speech has been justly admired as one of the most striking passages in the whole work; but it is so plain that it only requires an attentive reader. It may, however, be worthy of our observation, that, in all the instances before us, the pilgrims are represented as resting their only dependence, at the closing scene, on the mercy of God, through the righteousness and atonement of His Son; and yet recollecting their conscious integrity, boldness in professing and contending for the truth, love to the cause, example, and words of Christ, obedience to His precepts, delight in His ways, preservation from their own iniquities, and consistent behaviour, as evidences that their faith was living, and their hope warranted; and in this way the retrospect conduced to their encouragement. Moreover, they all concur in declaring that, while they left their infirmities behind them, they should take their graces along with them, and that their works would follow them.'. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O who is able to conceive the inexpressible, inconceivable joys of Heaven! How will the heavens echo with joy, when the bride, the Lamb's wife, shall come to dwell with her husband forever! Christ, the desire of nations, the joy of angels, the delight of the Father; what solace then must the soul be filled with, that hath the possession of Him to all eternity! O what acclamations of joy will there be, when all the children of God shall meet together, without fear of being disturbed by the anti-Christian and Cainish brood! If you would be better satisfied what the beatific vision means, my request is, that you would live holily, and go and see. <cite>—(Bunyan's Dying Sayings, vol. 1, p. 65)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was not without design that our excellent author tells us, that the four boys, with their wives and children, were suffered to continue in life for a time, for the increase of the church in the place where they dwelt. He doubtless intended to write a Third Part of his 'Pilgrims Progress,' founded upon this circumstance, with a design, probably to show the influence of real religion and evangelical sentiments on persons in business and in domestic life. <cite>—(Ivimey)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-part2-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The view of the peaceful and joyful death of the pilgrims, cannot but affect every reader; and many, perhaps, may be ready to say, 'Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his'; but, except they make it their principal concern to live the life of the righteous, such a wish will be frustrated. If any man, therefore, doubt whether this allegory do indeed describe the rise and progress of religion in the soul—the beginning, continuance, and termination of the godly man's course to Heaven, let him diligently search the Scriptures, and fervently pray to God, from whom alone 'cometh every good and perfect gift,' to enable him to determine this question. But let such as own themselves to be satisfied that it does, beware lest they rest in the pleasure of reading an ingenious work on the subject, or in the ability of developing many of the author's emblems. Let them beware lest they be fascinated, as it were, into a persuasion that they actually accompany the pilgrims in the life of faith and walking with God, in the same measure as they keep pace with the author in discovering and approving the grand outlines of His plan. And let everyone carefully examine his state, sentiments, experience, motives, tempers, affections, and conduct, by the various characters, incidents, and observations, that pass under his review—assured that this is a matter of the greatest consequence. We ought not, indeed, to call any man master, or subscribe absolutely to all his sentiments; yet the diligent practical student of Scripture can scarcely doubt that the warnings, counsels, and instructions of this singular work agree with that sacred touchstone, or that characters and actions will at last be approved or condemned by the Judge of the world, in a great degree according to the sentence passed on them in this wise and faithful book. The Lord grant that both the writer and readers of these observations 'may find mercy in that day,' and be addressed in these gracious words, 'Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.'. <cite>—(Scott)</cite> <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-part2-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
