<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Works from Which Notes to This Edition Have Been Selected</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="foreword" epub:type="foreword">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Works from Which Notes to This Edition Have Been Selected</h2>
			<p>The following are the principal works from which the Notes to this Edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i> have been selected:⁠—</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, Part the First. 12mo, <time datetime="1776">1776</time>. The preface states, that “an edition, containing some brief notes to illustrate the more difficult passages, has been long desired. An attempt of this kind is now submitted to the public.” This appears to be the first edition with notes. There is no indication of who the notes are by; but there can be little doubt but that they are from the pen of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Newton, the friend of Cowper. The Editor has four editions of this interesting volume⁠—<time datetime="1776">1776</time>, <time datetime="1782">1782</time>, <time datetime="1789">1789</time>, and <time datetime="1797">1797</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>; both Parts, with Notes. By <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Mason. 8vo, <time datetime="1778">1778</time>. In the preface, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason says, “I have often wished to see some explanatory notes upon certain passages in it. Having been solicited to undertake this, at a time when no one had attempted it, I have endeavoured, according to the ability which God has given me, to execute it.” This book was published in numbers, and the notes proved very acceptable. The subscribers requested that more frequent and longer notes should be given. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason promises to comply with this request. The advertisement is dated “Rotherhithe, <time datetime="1776-03-08">March 8, 1776</time>.”</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, with Notes. By A Bachelor of Arts of Oxford⁠—<abbr class="name">J. B.</abbr> 8vo. <time datetime="1792">1792</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i> in blank verse. By <abbr class="name">J. S.</abbr> Dodd, <abbr class="degree">MD</abbr> Dublin, <time datetime="1793">1793</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, with a Key to the Allegory. Published by Heptinstall, <time datetime="1796">1796</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, divided into Chapters. By the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Burder, of Coventry. 12mo, <time datetime="1797">1797</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Key to the Pilgrim’s Progress</i>. By Andronicus. 12mo, second edition, <time datetime="1797">1797</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, with Notes. By the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Scott. 8vo.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress versified</i>, with short Notes. By <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Burder, <time datetime="1804">1804</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, with Life. By M’Nicoll and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Clarke. 8vo, <time datetime="1809">1809</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Warr’s Course of Lectures, Illustrative of the Pilgrim’s Progress</i>. 8vo, <time datetime="1825">1825</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, with Historical and Practical Notes. By the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Ivimey. 8vo. Oxford, <time datetime="1824">1824</time>; London, <time datetime="1829">1829</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, an Epic Poem. By <abbr class="name">C. C. V. G.</abbr> 8vo. Parsonstown, <time datetime="1844">1844</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, an Epic Poem, Two Parts. Published by Bagster, <time datetime="1845">1845</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cheever’s [exceedingly interesting] <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lectures</i>. <time datetime="1846">1846</time>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The extracts from Bunyan’s other works, which so admirably illustrate his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, have a reference to this new edition.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
