<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Author’s Apology for His Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-1" epub:type="preface">
			<h2>The Author’s Apology for His Book</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When at the first I took my pen in hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus for to write, I did not understand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I at all should make a little book</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a mode; nay, I had undertook</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make another; which, when almost done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before I was aware, I this begun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thus it was: I, writing of the way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And race of saints, in this our gospel day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell suddenly into an allegory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About their journey, and the way to glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In more than twenty things which I set down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This done, I twenty more had in my crown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they again began to multiply,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, then, thought I, if that you breed so fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll put you by yourselves, lest you at last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should prove ad infinitum, and eat out</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The book that I already am about.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well, so I did; but yet I did not think</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shew to all the world my pen and ink</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a mode; I only thought to make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I knew not what; nor did I undertake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereby to please my neighbour: no, not I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did it my own self to gratify.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Neither did I but vacant seasons spend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this my scribble; nor did I intend</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to divert myself in doing this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From worser thoughts which make me do amiss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus, I set pen to paper with delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quickly had my thoughts in black and white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, having now my method by the end,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still as I pulled, it came; and so I penned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It down: until it came at last to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For length and breadth, the bigness which you see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well, when I had thus put mine ends together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shewed them others, that I might see whether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would condemn them, or them justify:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some said, Let them live; some, Let them die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some said, JOHN, print it; others said, Not so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some said, It might do good; others said, No.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now was I in a strait, and did not see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was the best thing to be done by me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At last I thought, Since you are thus divided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I print it will, and so the case decided.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For, thought I, some, I see, would have it done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though others in that channel do not run:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prove, then, who advised for the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I thought fit to put it to the test.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I further thought, if now I did deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those that would have it, thus to gratify.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not know but hinder them I might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of that which would to them be great delight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For those which were not for its coming forth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I said to them, Offend you I am loth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, since your brethren pleased with it be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbear to judge till you do further see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If that thou wilt not read, let it alone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, that I might them better palliate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did too with them thus expostulate:⁠—</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>May I not write in such a style as this?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a method, too, and yet not miss</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My end⁠—thy good? Why may it not be done?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark clouds bring waters, when the bright bring none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, dark or bright, if they their silver drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cause to descend, the earth, by yielding crops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But treasures up the fruit they yield together;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, so commixes both, that in her fruit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None can distinguish this from that: they suit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her well when hungry; but, if she be full,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spews out both, and makes their blessings null.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>You see the ways the fisherman doth take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To catch the fish; what engines doth he make?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold how he engageth all his wits;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also his snares, lines, angles, hooks, and nets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet fish there be, that neither hook, nor line,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor snare, nor net, nor engine can make thine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They must be groped for, and be tickled too,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or they will not be catch’d, whate’er you do.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How does the fowler seek to catch his game</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By divers means! all which one cannot name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His guns, his nets, his lime-twigs, light, and bell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He creeps, he goes, he stands; yea, who can tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all his postures? Yet there’s none of these</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will make him master of what fowls he please.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, he must pipe and whistle to catch this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, if he does so, that bird he will miss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>If that a pearl may in a toad’s head dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may be found too in an oyster-shell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If things that promise nothing do contain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What better is than gold; who will disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have an inkling of it, there to look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may find it? Now, my little book,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Though void of all these paintings that may make</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It with this or the other man to take)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not without those things that do excel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What do in brave but empty notions dwell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘Well, yet I am not fully satisfied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this your book will stand, when soundly tried.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, what’s the matter? ‘It is dark.’ What though?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘But it is feigned.’ What of that? I trow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some men, by feigned words, as dark as mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make truth to spangle and its rays to shine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>‘But they want solidness.’ Speak, man, thy mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘They drown the weak; metaphors make us blind.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Solidity, indeed, becomes the pen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him that writeth things divine to men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But must I needs want solidness, because</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By metaphors I speak? Were not God’s laws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His gospel laws, in olden times held forth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By types, shadows, and metaphors? Yet loth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will any sober man be to find fault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With them, lest he be found for to assault</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The highest wisdom. No, he rather stoops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeks to find out what by pins and loops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By calves and sheep, by heifers and by rams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By birds and herbs, and by the blood of lambs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God speaketh to him; and happy is he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That finds the light and grace that in them be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be not too forward, therefore, to conclude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I want solidness⁠—that I am rude;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things solid in show not solid be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things in parables despise not we;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest things most hurtful lightly we receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And things that good are, of our souls bereave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My dark and cloudy words, they do but hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The truth, as cabinets enclose the gold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prophets used much by metaphors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To set forth truth; yea, who so considers Christ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>his apostles too, shall plainly see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That truths to this day in such mantles be.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Am I afraid to say, that holy writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which for its style and phrase puts down all wit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is everywhere so full of all these things⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark figures, allegories? Yet there springs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From that same book that lustre, and those rays</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of light, that turn our darkest nights to days.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Come, let my carper to his life now look,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find there darker lines than in my book</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He findeth any; yea, and let him know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in his best things there are worse lines too.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>May we but stand before impartial men,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his poor one I dare adventure ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they will take my meaning in these lines</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far better than his lies in silver shrines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, truth, although in swaddling clouts, I find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Informs the judgement, rectifies the mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleases the understanding, makes the will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Submit; the memory too it doth fill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With what doth our imaginations please;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Likewise it tends our troubles to appease.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sound words, I know, Timothy is to use,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And old wives’ fables he is to refuse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet grave Paul him nowhere did forbid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The use of parables; in which lay hid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gold, those pearls, and precious stones that were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worth digging for, and that with greatest care.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Let me add one word more. O man of God,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou offended? Dost thou wish I had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put forth my matter in another dress?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, that I had in things been more express?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three things let me propound; then I submit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To those that are my betters, as is fit.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>1. I find not that I am denied the use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this my method, so I no abuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put on the words, things, readers; or be rude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In handling figure or similitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In application; but, all that I may,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek the advance of truth this or that way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Denied, did I say? Nay, I have leave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Example too, and that from them that have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God better pleased, by their words or ways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than any man that breatheth now-a-days)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to express my mind, thus to declare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Things unto thee that excellentest are.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>2. I find that men (as high as trees) will write</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dialogue-wise; yet no man doth them slight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For writing so: indeed, if they abuse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To that intent; but yet let truth be free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make her sallies upon thee and me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which way it pleases God; for who knows how,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than he that taught us first to plough,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To guide our mind and pens for his design?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he makes base things usher in divine.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>3. I find that holy writ in many places</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath semblance with this method, where the cases</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do call for one thing, to set forth another;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Use it I may, then, and yet nothing smother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth’s golden beams: nay, by this method may</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make it cast forth its rays as light as day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now before I do put up my pen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I’ll shew the profit of my book, and then</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commit both thee and it unto that Hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This book it chalketh out before thine eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The man that seeks the everlasting prize;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It shews you whence he comes, whither he goes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What he leaves undone, also what he does;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It also shows you how he runs and runs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he unto the gate of glory comes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It shows, too, who set out for life amain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As if the lasting crown they would obtain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here also you may see the reason why</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They lose their labour, and like fools do die.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This book will make a traveller of thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If by its counsel thou wilt ruled be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will direct thee to the Holy Land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wilt its directions understand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, it will make the slothful active be;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blind also delightful things to see.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Art thou for something rare and profitable?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldest thou see a truth within a fable?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou forgetful? Wouldest thou remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From New-Year’s day to the last of December?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then read my fancies; they will stick like burs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And may be, to the helpless, comforters.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This book is writ in such a dialect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As may the minds of listless men affect:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seems a novelty, and yet contains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing but sound and honest gospel strains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou divert thyself from melancholy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou be pleasant, yet be far from folly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou read riddles, and their explanation?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else be drowned in thy contemplation?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou love picking meat? Or wouldst thou see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man in the clouds, and hear him speak to thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst thou be in a dream, and yet not sleep?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or wouldst thou in a moment laugh and weep?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldest thou lose thyself and catch no harm,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And find thyself again without a charm?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldst read thyself, and read thou knowest not what,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet know whether thou art blest or not,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By reading the same lines? Oh, then come hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay my book, thy head, and heart together.</span>
			</p>
			<footer>
				<p>JOHN BUNYAN</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
