<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Author’s Way of Sending Forth His Second Part of the Pilgrim</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface-2" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Author’s Way of Sending Forth His Second Part of the Pilgrim</h2>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Go now, my little book, to every place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where my first Pilgrim has but shown his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call at their door. If any say, Who’s there?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then answer thou, <b>Christiana</b> is here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they bid thee come in, then enter thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all thy boys; and then, as thou know’st how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell who they are, also from whence they came;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps they know them by their looks, or name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if they should not, ask them yet again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If formerly they did not entertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One <b>Christian</b>, a Pilgrim? If they say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did; and were delighted in his way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let them know, that those related were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto him; yea, his wife and children are.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tell them, that they have left their house and home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are turned Pilgrims, seek a world to come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they have met with hardships in the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they do meet with troubles night and day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they have trod on serpents, fought with devils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have also overcome a many evils.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, tell them also of the next, who have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of love to pilgrimage, been stout and brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defenders of that way, and how they still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refuse this world, to do their Father’s will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go, tell them also of those dainty things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pilgrimage unto the Pilgrim brings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them acquainted be, too, how they are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beloved of their King, under His care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What goodly mansions for them He provides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they meet with rough winds, and swelling tides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How brave a calm they will enjoy at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to their Lord, and by His ways hold fast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps with heart and hand they will embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, as they did my firstling, and will grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee, and thy fellows, with such cheer and fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As show will they of Pilgrims lovers are.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Objection 1</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>But how, if they will not believe of me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am truly thine; cause some there be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That counterfeit the Pilgrim and his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek, by disguise, to seem the very same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by that means have wrought themselves into</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hands and houses of I know not who?</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Answer</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>’Tis true, some have of late, to counterfeit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim, to their own my title set;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-563" id="noteref-563" epub:type="noteref">563</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea others, half my name and title too</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have stitched to their book, to make them do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet they, by their features, do declare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves not mine to be, whose e’er they are.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If such thou meet’st with, then thine only way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before them all, is, to say out thy say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thine own native language, which no man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now useth, nor with ease dissemble can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, after all, they still of you shall doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking that you, like gipsies, go about</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In naughty wise, the country to defile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that you seek good people to beguile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With things unwarrantable; send for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will testify you <em>pilgrims</em> be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, I will testify that only you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrims are; and that alone will do.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Objection 2</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>But yet, perhaps, I may inquire for him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those that wish him damned, life and limb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What shall I do, when I at such a door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Pilgrims ask, and they shall rage the more?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-564" id="noteref-564" epub:type="noteref">564</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Answer</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Fright not thyself, my book, for such bugbears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are nothing else but ground for groundless fears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim’s book has travell’d sea and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could I never come to understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it was slighted, or turn’d out of door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By any kingdom, were they rich or poor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In France and Flanders, where men kill each other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim is esteem’d a friend, a brother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Holland too, ’tis said, as I am told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim is with some worth more than gold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Highlanders and wild Irish can agree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim should familiar with them be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis in New England under such advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receives there so much loving countenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to be trimm’d, new cloth’d, and deck’d with gems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it may show its features and its limbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet more; so comely doth my Pilgrim walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of him thousands daily sing and talk.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-565" id="noteref-565" epub:type="noteref">565</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If you draw nearer home, it will appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim knows no ground of shame or fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>City and country will him entertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With, Welcome Pilgrim; yea, they can’t refrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From smiling, if my Pilgrim be but by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or shows his head in any company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Brave gallants do my Pilgrim hug and love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteem it much, yea, value it above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things of a greater bulk: yea, with delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, My lark’s leg is better than a kite.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Young ladies, and young gentlewomen too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do no small kindness to my Pilgrim show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their cabinets, their bosoms, and their hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pilgrim has, ’cause he to them imparts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His pretty riddles in such wholesome strains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As yields them profit double to their pains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of reading; yea, I think, I may be bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say, some prize him far above their gold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The very children that do walk the street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they do but my holy Pilgrim meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Salute him well, will wish him well, and say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is the only stripling of the day.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They that have never seen him, yet admire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What they have heard of him, and much desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have his company, and hear him tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those pilgrim stories which he knows so well.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yea, some who did not love him at the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But called him fool and noddy, say they must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now they have seen and heard him, him commend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to those whom they love, they do him send.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-566" id="noteref-566" epub:type="noteref">566</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore, my Second Part, thou need’st not be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afraid to show thy head; none can hurt thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wish but well to him that went before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Cause thou com’st after with a second store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of things as good, as rich, as profitable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For young, for old, for stagg’ring, and for stable.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Objection 3</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>But some there he that say, He laughs too loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some do say, His head is in a cloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some say, His words and stories are so dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They know not how, by them, to find his mark.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Answer</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>One may, I think, say, Both his laughs and cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May well be guess’d at by his wat’ry eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some things are of that nature, as to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One’s fancy chuckle, while his heart doth ache.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Jacob saw his Rachel with the sheep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did at the same time both kiss and weep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Whereas some say, A cloud is in his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth but show how wisdom’s covered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its own mantles, and to stir the mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a search after what it fain would find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things that seem to be hid in words obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do but the godly mind the more allure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To study what those sayings should contain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That speak to us in such a cloudy strain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I also know a dark similitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will on the fancy more itself intrude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will stick faster in the heart and head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than things from similes not borrowed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore, my book, let no discouragement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hinder thy travels. Behold, thou art sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To friends, not foes; to friends that will give place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, thy Pilgrims, and thy words embrace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, what my first Pilgrim left conceal’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, my brave second Pilgrim, hast reveal’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What <b>Christian</b> left lock’d up, and went his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet <b>Christiana</b> opens with her key.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-567" id="noteref-567" epub:type="noteref">567</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Objection 4</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>But some love not the method of your first;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Romance they count it, throw’t away as dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I should meet with such, what should I say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must I slight them as they slight me, or nay?</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>
				<b>Answer</b>
			</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>My <b>Christiana</b>, if with such thou meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all means, in all loving-wise, them greet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Render them not reviling for revile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if they frown, I prithee on them smile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps ’tis nature, or some ill report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has made them thus despise, or thus retort.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some love no cheese, some love no fish, and some</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love not their friends, nor their own house or home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some start at pig, slight chicken, love not fowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than they love a cuckoo, or an owl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave such, my <b>Christiana</b>, to their choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seek those who to find thee will rejoice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By no means strive, but in humble-wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Present thee to them in thy Pilgrim’s guise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go, then, my little book, and show to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That entertain, and bid thee welcome shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thou shalt keep close, shut up from the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wish what thou shalt show them may be blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them for good, may make them choose to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pilgrims better by far than thee or me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go, then, I say, tell all men who thou art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, I am <b>Christiana</b>, and my part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is now, with my four sons, to tell you what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is for men to take a Pilgrims lot.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Go also, tell them who and what they be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now do go on pilgrimage with thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, Here’s my neighbour, Mercy, she is one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That has long time with me a Pilgrim gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, see her in her virgin race, and learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt idle ones and Pilgrims to discern.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, let young damsels learn of her to prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world which is to come, in any wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When little tripping maidens follow God,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave old doting sinners to His rod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis like those days wherein the young ones cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hosanna! to whom old ones did deride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Next, tell them of old Honest, who you found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his white hairs, treading the Pilgrim’s ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, tell them how plain-hearted this man was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How after his good Lord he bare his cross.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps with some gray head this may prevail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Christ to fall in love, and sin bewail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tell them also, how Master Fearing went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pilgrimage, and how the time he spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solitariness, with fears and cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how, at last, he won the joyful prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a good man, though much down in spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is a good man, and doth life inherit.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tell them of Master Feeble-mind also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, not before, but still behind would go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show them also, how he had like been slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how one Great-heart did his life regain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man was true of heart, though weak in grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One might true godliness read in his face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then tell them of Master Ready-to-halt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man with crutches, but much without fault;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell them how Master Feeble-mind and he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did love, and in opinions much agree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let all know, though weakness was their chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet sometimes one could sing, the other dance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forget not Master Valiant-for-the-truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That man of courage, though a very youth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell everyone his spirit was so stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man could ever make him face about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how Great-heart and he could not forbear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But put down Doubting Castle, slay Despair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Overlook not Master Despondency,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Much-afraid, his daughter, though they lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under such mantles, as may make them look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(With some) as if their God had them forsook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They softly went, but sure, and at the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found that the Lord of Pilgrims was their friend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thou hast told the world of all these things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turn about, my book, and touch these strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, if but touch’d, will such music make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’ll make a cripple dance, a giant quake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These riddles that lie couch’d within thy breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freely propound, expound; and for the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thy mysterious lines, let them remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For those whose nimble fancies shall them gain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now may this little book a blessing be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who love this little book and me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may its buyer have no cause to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His money is but lost or thrown away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, may this Second Pilgrim yield that fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As may with each good Pilgrim’s fancy suit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may it persuade some that go astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To turn their feet and heart to the right way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the hearty prayer of</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<footer>
				<p>The Author,</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">John Bunyan</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
